





1


SITTING BESIDE THE HOAD, WATCHING THE WAGON MOUNT

the hill toward her, Lena thinks* 1 have come from Ala-
bama: a fur piece. All the way from Alabama a- walking. A
fur piece 5 Thinking although I have not been quite a month
on the road I am already in Mississippi, further fiom home
than I have ever been before. I am now further from
Doane’s Mill than I have been since I was twelve years old

She had never even. been to Doanes Mill until after her
father and mother died, though six or eight times a year she
went to town on Saturday, in the wagon, in a mail-order
dress and her bare feet flat in the wagon bed and her shoes
wrapped in a piece of paper beside her on the seat. She
would put on the shoes just before the wagon reached
town. After she got to be a big girl she would ask her father
to stop the wagon at the edge of town and she would get
down and walk. She would not tell her father why she
wanted to walk in instead of riding. He thought that it was
because of the smooth streets, the sidewalks. But it was be-
cause she believed that the people who saw her and whom
she passed on foot would believe that she lived in the town
too.

When she was twelve years old her father and mother

3



4

died in the same summer, in a log house of three rooms and
a hall, without screens, m a room lighted by a bug-swirled
kerosene lamp, the naked floor worn smooth as old silver by
naked feet She was the youngest living child. Her mother
died first. She said, “Take care of paw.” Lena did so Then
one day her father said, “You go to Doane’s Mill with
McKinley. You get ready to go, be ready when he comes ”
Then he died. McKinley, the bi other, arrived in a wagon.
They buried the father m a grove behind a country church
one afternoon, with a pine headstone The next morning
she departed foiever, though it is possible that she did not
know this at the time, m the wagon with McKinley, for
Doane’s Mill. The wagon was borrowed and the brother
had promised to return it by nightfall.

The brother worked in the mill All the men in the village
worked in the mill or for it. It was cutting pine. It had been
there seven years and in seven years more it would destroy
all the timber within its reach. Then some of the machinery
and most of the men who ran it and existed because of and
for it would be loaded onto freight cars and moved away.
But some of the machinery would be left, since new pieces
could always be bought on the installment plan — gaunt,
staring, motionless wheels rising from mounds of brick rub-
ble and ragged weeds with a quality profoundly astonish-
ing, and gutted boilers lifting their rusting and unsmoking
stacks with an air stubborn, baffled and bemused upon a
stumppocked scene of profound and peaceful desolation,
unplowed, untilled, gutting slowly into red and choked ra-
vines beneath the long quiet rains of autumn and the gal-
loping fury of vernal equinoxes. Then the hamlet which at
its best day had borne no name listed on Postoffice Depart-
ment annals would not now even be remembered by the
hookwormridden heirs-at-large who pulled the buildings
down and burned them in cookstoves and winter grates.

There were perhaps five families there when Lena ar-



5

rived. There was a track and a station, and once a day a
mixed train fled shrieking through it. The train could be
stopped with a red flag, but by ordinary it appeared out
of the devastated hills with apparitionlike suddenness and
wailing like a banshee, athwart and past that little less-
than-village like a forgotten bead from a broken string The
brother was twenty years her senior. She hardly remem-
beied him at all when she came to live with him. He lived
in a four room and unpainted house with his labor- and
chiidridden wife For almost half of every year the sis ter-
m-law was either lying m or recovering During this time
Lena did all the housework and took care of the other chil-
dren. Later she told herself, 1 reckon that's why I got one
so quick myself.'

She slept in a leanto room at the back of the house. It
had a window which she learned to open and close again
in the dark without making a sound, even though there also
slept in the leanto room at first her oldest nephew and then
the two oldest and then the three. She had lived there eight
years before she opened the window for the first time. She
had not opened it a dozen times hardly before she discov-
ered that she should not have opened it at all. She said to
herself, ‘That's just my luck.'

The sister-in-law told the brother. Then he remarked her
changing shape, which he should have noticed some time
before. He was a hard man. Softness and gentleness and
youth (he was just forty) and almost everything else except
a kind of stubborn and despairing fortitude and the bleak
heritage of his bloodpride had been sweated out of him.
He called her whore. He accused the right man (young
bachelors, or sawdust Casanovas anyway, were even fewer
in number than families) but she would not admit it,
though the man had departed six months ago. She just re*
peated stubbornly, “He's going to send for me. He said he
would send for me”; unshakable, sheeplike, having drawn



6

upon that reserve of patient and steadfast fidelity upon
which the Lucas Burches depend and trust, even though
they do not intend to be present when the need for it arises
Two weeks later she climbed again thiough the window. It
was a little difficult, this time. If it had been this hard to do
before, I reckon I would not be doing it now , 5 she thought.
She could have departed by the door, by daylight. Nobody
would have stopped her. Perhaps she knew that. But she
chose to go by night, and through the window. She carried
a palm leaf fan and a small bundle tied neatly in a ban-
danna handkerchief. It contained among other tilings
thirty-five cents in nickels and dimes. Her shoes were a pair
of his own which her brother had given to her. They were
but slightly worn, since in the summer neither of them wore
shoes at all. When she felt the dust of the road beneath her
feet she removed the shoes and carried them in her hand.

She had been doing that now for almost four weeks.
Behind her the four weeks, the evocation of far , is a peace-
ful corridor paved with unflagging and tranquil faith and
peopled with kind and nameless faces and voices: Lucas
Burch? I dont know . I dont know of anybody by that name
around here. This road? It goes to Pocahontas , He might
be there . It's possible . Here's a wagon that's going a piece
of the way. It will take you that far; backrolling now be-
hind her a long monotonous succession of peaceful and un-
deviating changes from day to dark and dark to day again,
through which she advanced in identical and anonymous
and deliberate wagons as though through a succession of
creakwheeled and limpeared avatars, like something mov-
ing forever and without progress across an urn.

The wagon mounts the hill toward her. She passed it
about a mile back down the road. It was standing beside
the road, the mules asleep in the traces and their heads
pointed in the direction m which she walked. She saw it
and she saw the two men squatting beside a barn beyond



7

the fence. She looked at the wagon and the men once: a
single glance all-embracing, swift, innocent and profound.
She did not stop, very likely the men beyond the fence had
not seen her even look at the wagon or at them. Neither
did she look back. She went on out of sight, walking slowly,
the shoes unlaced about her ankles, until she reached the
top of the hill a mile beyond. Then she sat down on the
ditchbank, with her feet in the shallow ditch, and removed
the shoes. After a while she began to hear the wagon. She
heard it for some time. Then it came into sight, mounting
the hill

T'he sharp and brittle crack and clatter of its weathered
and ungreased wood and metal is slow and terrific: a series
of dry sluggish reports carrying for a half mile across the
hot still pmewiney silence of the August afternoon. Though
the mules plod in a steady and unflagging hypnosis, the
vehicle does not seem to progress. It seems to hang sus-
pended in the middle distance forever and forever, so in-
finitesimal is its progress, like a shabby bead upon the mild
red string of road. So much is this so that in the watching
of it the eye loses it as sight and sense drowsily merge and
blend, like the road itself, with all the peaceful and mo-
notonous changes between darkness and day, like already
measured thread being rewound onto a spool. So that at
last, as though out of some trivial and unimportant region
beyond even distance, the sound of it seems to come slow
and terrific and without meaning, as though it were a ghost
travelling a half mile ahead of its own shape. "That far
within my hearing before my seeing/ Lena thinks. She
thinks of herself as already moving, riding again, thinking
then it will be as if I were riding for a half mile before I
even got into the wagon , before the wagon even got to
where I was waiting , and that when the wagon is empty
of me again it will go on for a half mile with me still in it
She waits, not even watching the wagon now, while think-



8

ing goes idle and swift and smooth, filled with nameless
kind faces and voices: Lucas Burch P You say you tried
in PocahontasP This road? It goes to Springvale. You wait
here. There will he a wagon passing soon that will take you
as far as it goes Thinking, "And if he is going all the way to
Jeff ei son, I will be riding within the healing of Lucas Burch
before his seeing. He will hear the wagon, but he wont
know. So there will be one within his hearing before his
seeing. And then he will see me and he will be excited. And
so there will be two within his seeing before his remember-
ing**

While Armstid and Winterbottom were squatting against
the shady wall of Winterbottom s stable, they saw her pass
in the road. They saw at once that she was young, preg-
nant, and a stranger. "1 wonder where she got that belly/*
Winterbottom said.

“I wonder how far she has brought it afoot/* Armstid
said.

“Visiting somebody back down the road, I reckon/* Win-
terbottom said.

“I reckon not Or I would have heard. And it aint nobody
up my way, neither. I would have heard that, too/*

“I reckon she knows where she is going/* Winterbottom
said. “She walks like it.”

“Shell have company, before she goes much further”
Armstid said. The woman had now gone on, slowly, with
her swelling and unmistakable burden. Neither of them had
seen her so much as glance at them when she passed in a
shapeless garment of faded blue, carrying a palmleaf fan
and a small cloth bundle. “She aint come from nowhere
close/* Armstid said. “She’s hitting that lick like she’s been
at it for a right smart while and had a right smart piece to
go yet.”



9

"She must be visiting around here somewhere/’ Winter-
bottom said.

U 1 reckon I would have heard about it,* Armstid said.
The woman went on. She had not looked back. She went
out of sight up the road: swollen, slow, deliberate, unhur-
ried and tireless as augmenting afternoon itself. She walked
out of their talking too; perhaps out of their minds too.
Because after a while Armstid said what he had come to
say He had already made two previous trips, coming in his
wagon five miles and squatting and spitting for three hours
beneath the shady wall of Wmterbottom’s bam with the
timeless unhaste and indirection of his kind, in order to say
it. It was to make Winterbottom an offer for a cultivator
which Winterbottom wanted to sell. At last Armstid looked
at the sun and offered the price which he had decided to
offer while lying m bed three nights ago. "I know of one in
Jefferson I can buy at that figure,” he said.

* I reckon you better buy it,” Winterbottom said. "It
sounds like a bargain ”

"Sho * Armstid said. He spat He looked again at the sun,
and rose, "Well, I reckon I better get on toward home ”

He got into his wagon and waked the mules. That is, he
put them into motion, since only a Negro can tell when a
mule is asleep or awake, Winterbottom followed him to the
fence, leaning his arms on the top rail. "Yes, sir,” he said.
*Td sho buy that cultivator at that figure. If you dont take
it, I be dog if I aint a good mind to buy it, myself, at that
price, I reckon the fellow that owns it aint got a span of
mules to sell for about five dollars, has he?”

"Sho,” Armstid said. He drove on, the wagon beginning
to fall into its slow and mileconsuming clatter. Neither does
he look back. Apparently he is not looking ahead either,
because he does not see the woman sitting in the ditch be-
side the road until the wagon has almost reached the top



10

of the hill In the instant in which he lecognises the blue
dress he cannot tell if she has ever seen the wagon at all,
And no one could have known that he had ever looked at
her either as, without any semblance of progress in either
of them, they draw slowly together as the wagon crawls
terrifically toward her in its slow palpable aura of somno-
lence and red dust in which the steady feel of the mules
move dreamlike and punctuate by the sparse jingle of har-
ness and the hmbei bobbing of jackrabbit eais, the mules
still neither asleep nor awake as he halts them.

From beneath a sunbonnet of faded blue, weathered now
by other than formal soap and water, she looks up at
him quietly and pleasantly: young, pleasantfaced, candid,
friendly, and alert. She does not move yet. Beneath the
faded gaiment of that same weathered blue her body is
shapeless and immobile. The fan and the bundle lie on her
lap. She wears no stockings. Her bare feet rest side by side
in the shallow ditch The pair of dusty, heavy, manlookmg
shoes beside them are not more inert. In the hailed wagon
Armstid sits, humped, bleacheyed. He sees that the lim of ’
the fan is bound neatly in the same faded blue as the sun-
bonnet and the dress.

"How far you going?’’ he says.

“I was trying to get up the road a pieceways before dark/’
she says. She rises and takes up the shoes. She climbs slowly
and deliberately into the road, appioaching the wagon.
Armstid does not descend to help her. He merely holds the
team still while she climbs heavily over the wheel and sets
the shoes beneath the seat. Then the wagon moves on. "I
thank you,” she says. “It was right tiring afoot.”

Apparently Armstid has never once looked full at her.
Yet he has already seen that she wears no wedding ring.
He does not look at her now. Again the wagon settles into
its slow clatter. “How far you come from?” he says.

She expels her breath. It is not a sigh so much as a peace-



11

fill expiration, as though of peaceful astonishment “A right
good piece, it seems now. I come from Alabama ”

"Alabama? In your shape? Where’s your folks?”

She does not look at him, either. Tm looking to meet
him up this way. You might know him. His name is Lucas
Burch. They told me back yonder a ways that he is in Jef-
ferson, working for the planing mill.”

"Lucas Burch.” Armstid’s tone is almost identical with
hers. They sit side by side on the sagging and broken-
springed seat He can see her hands upon her lap and her
profile beneath the sunbonnet, from the corner of his eye
he sees it She seems to be watching the road as it unrolls
between the limber ears of the mules. "And you come all
the way here, afoot, by yourself, hunting for him?”

She does not answer for a moment. Then she says "Folks
have been kind. They have been right kind.”

"Womenfolks too?” From the corner of his eye he watches
her profile, thinking I dont know what Martha's going to
say thinking, ‘I reckon I do know what Martha’s going to
say. I reckon womenfolks are likely to be good without be-
ing very kind. Men, now, might. But it’s only a bad woman
herself that is likely to be very kind to another woman that
needs the kindness’ thinking Yes I do . I know exactly what
Martha is going to say

She sits a little forward, quite still, her profile quite still,
her cheek. "It’s a strange thing,” she says.

"How folks can look at a strange young gal walking the
road in your shape and know that her husband has left
her?” She does not move The wagon now has a kind of
rhythm, its ungreased and outraged wood one with the slow
afternoon, the road, the heat. "And you aim to find him up
here.”

She does not move, apparently watching the slow road
between the ears of the mules, the distance perhaps road-
carved and definite. "I reckon I’ll find him. It wont be hard.



12

Hell be where the most folks are gathered together, and
the laughing and joking is. He always was a hand for that”

Armstid grunts, a sound savage, brusque. "Get up,
mules,” he says, he says to himself, between thinking and
saying aloud. 1 leckon she will. I reckon that fellow is fix-
ing to find that he made a bad mistake when he stopped
this side of Arkansas, or even Texas.’

The sun is slanting, an hour above the horizon now,
above the swift coming of the summer night. The lane turns
from the road, quieter even than the road. "Here we are,”
Armstid says.

The woman moves at once. She reaches down and finds
the shoes, apparently she is not even going to delay the
. wagon long enough to put them on, "I thank you kindly ”
she says. "It was a help.”

The wagon is halted again. The woman is preparing to
descend. "Even if you get to Varner s store before sundown,
youll still be twelve miles from Jefferson,” Armstid says.

She holds the shoes, the bundle, the fan awkwardly in
one hand, the other free to help her down, "I reckon I better
get on,” she says.

Armstid does not touch her. "You come on and stay the ;
night at my house,” he says; "where womenfolks — where a
woman can ... if you — You come oil, now. 111 take you
on to Varners first thing in the morning, and you can get
a ride into town. There will be somebody going, on a Satur-
day. He aint going to get away on you overnight. If he is in
Jefferson at all, he will still be there tomorrow.”

She sits quite still, her possessions gathered into her hand
for dismounting. She is looking ahead, to where the road
curves on and away, crossslanted with shadows, "I reckon I
got a few days left ”

"Sho. You got plenty of time yet Only you are liable to
have some company at any time now that can’t walk. You
come on home with me.” He puts the mules into motion



13

without waiting for a reply. The wagon enters the lane, the
dim road. The woman sits back, though she still holds the
fan, the bundle, the shoes.

“I wouldn’t be beholden,” she says. “I wouldn’t trouble.”

“Sho,” Armstid says. “You come on with me.” For the first
time the mules move swiftly of their own accord “Smelling
com,” Armstid says, thinking, ‘But that’s the woman of it.
Her own self one of the first ones to cut the ground from
under a sister woman, she’ll walk the public country her-
self without shame because she knows that folks, menfolks,
will take care of her. She dont care nothing about women-
folks. It wasn’t any woman that got her into what she dont
even call trouble. Yes, sir. You just let one of them get mar-
ried or get into trouble without being married, and right
then and there is where she secedes from the woman race
and species and spends the balance of her life trying to get
joined up with the man race. That’s why they dip snuff and
smoke and want to vote.’

When the wagon passes the house and goes on toward
the bamlot, his wife is watching it from the front door. He
does not look in that direction; he does not need to look to
know that she will be there, is there. ‘Yes,’ he thinks with
sardonic ruefulness, turning the mules into the open gate,
1 know exactly what she is going to say. I reckon I know
exactly.’ He halts the wagon, he does not need to look to
know that his wife is now in the kitchen, not watching now;
just waiting. He halts the wagon. “You go on to the house,”
he says; he has already descended and the woman is now
climbing slowly down, with that inward listening delibera-
tion. “When you meet somebody, it will be Martha. I’ll be
in when I feed the stock.” He does not watch her cross the
lot and go on toward the kitchen. He does not need to. Step
by step with her he enters the kitchen door also and comes
upon the woman who now watches the kitchen door ex-
actly as she had watched the wagon pass from the front



14

one, T reckon I know exactly what she will say/ he thinks.

He takes the team out and waters and stalls and feeds
them, and lets the cows in from the pasture. Then he goes
to the kitchen. She is still there, the gray woman with a
cold, harsh, irascible face, who bore five children in six years
and raised them to man- and womanhood. She is not idle.
He does not look at her. He goes to the sink and fills a
pan from the pail and turns his sleeves back “Her name is
Burch/' he says. “At least that's what she says the fellows
name is that she is hunting for. Lucas Buich. Somebody
told her back down the road a ways that he is in Jefferson
now." He begins to wash, his back to her. “She come all the
way from Alabama, alone and afoot, she says."

Mrs Armstid does not look around. She is busy at the
table. “She's going to quit being alone a good while before
she sees Alabama again,” she says.

“Or that fellow Burch either, I reckon.” He is quite busy
at the sink, with the soap and water. And he can feel her
looking at him, at the back of his head, his shoulders in the
shirt of sweatfaded blue. “She says that somebody down at
Samson's told her there is a fellow named Burch or some-
thing working at the planing mill in Jefferson ”

“And she expects to find him there. Waiting. With the
house all furnished and all.”

He cannot tell from her voice if she is watching him or
not now. He towels himself with a split floursack. “Maybe
she will. If it's running away from her he's after, I reckon
he's going to find out he made a bad mistake when he
stopped before he put the Mississippi River between them.”
And now he knows that she is watching him: the gray
woman not plump and not thin, manhard, workhard, in a
serviceable gray garment worn savage and brusque, her
hands on her hips, her face like those of generals who have
been defeated in battle.

“You men/' she says.



15

"What do you want to do about it? Turn her out? Let her
sleep in the bam maybe?"'

"You men” she says. “You durn men.”

They enter the kitchen together, though Mrs Armstid is
in front. She goes straight to the stove Lena stands just
within the door. Her head is uncovered now, her hair
combed smooth. Even the blue garment looks freshened
and rested. She looks on while Mrs Armstid at the stove
clashes the metal lids and handles the sticks of wood with
the abrupt savageness of a man. "I would like to help/'
Lena says.

Mrs Armstid does not look around. She clashes the stove
savagely. “You stay where you are. You keep off your feet
now, and youll keep off your back a while longer maybe.”

"It would be a beholden kindness to let me help.”

"You stay where you are. I been doing this three times a
day for thirty years now. The time when I needed help with
it is done passed.” She is busy at the stove, not backlooking.
"Armstid says your name is Burch.”

"Yes,” the other says. Her voice is quite grave now, quite
quiet. She sits quite still, her hands motionless upon her lap.
And Mrs Armstid does not look around either. She is still
busy at the stove. It appears to require an amount of atten-
tion out of all proportion to the savage finality with which
she built the fire. It appears to engage as much of her atten-
tion as if it were an expensive watch.

"Is your name Burch yet?” Mrs Armstid says,

The young woman does not answer at once. Mrs Armstid
does not rattle the stove now, though her back is still to-
ward the younger woman. Then she turns. They look at one
another, suddenly naked, watching one another: the young
woman in the chair, with her neat hair and her inert hands
upon her lap, and the older one beside the stove, turning,
motionless too, with a savage screw of gray hair at the base



16

of her skull and a face that might have been caived in sand-
stone. Then the youngei one speaks.

“I told you false. My name is not Burch yet. It's Lena
Grove.”

They look at one anothex. Mis Armstids voice is neither
cold nor warm. It is not anything at all. “And so you want
to catch up with him so your name will be Burch in time.
Is that it?”

Lena is looking down now, as though watching her hands
upon her lap. Her voice is quiet, dogged. Yet it is serene.
“I dont reckon I need any promise from Lucas. It just hap-
pened unfortunate so, that he had to go away. His plans
just never worked out right for him to come back for me
like he aimed to. I reckon me and him didn’t need to
make word promises. When he found out that night that he
would have to go, he — ”

"Found out what night? The night you told him about
that chap?”

The other does not answer for a moment Her face is
calm as stone, but not hard. Its doggedness has a soft qual-
ity, an inwardlighted quality of tranquil and calm unreason
and detachment. Mrs Armstid watches her. Lena is not look-
ing at the other woman while she speaks. "He had done got
the word about how he might have to leave a long time
before that. He just never told me sooner because he didn’t
want to worry me with it. When he first heard about how
he might have to leave, he knowed then it would be best to
go, that he could get along faster somewhere where the
foreman wouldn’t be down on him. But he kept on putting
it off. But when this here happened, we couldn’t put it off
no longer then. The foreman was down on Lucas because
he didn’t like him because Lucas was young and full of life
all the time and the foreman wanted Lucas’ job to give it to
a cousin of his. But he hadn’t aimed to tell me because it
would just woriy me, But when this here happened, we



17

couldn’t wait any longer, I was the one that said for him to
go. He said he would stay if I said so, whether the foreman
treated him right or not. But I said for him to go. He never
wanted to go, even then. But I said for him to. To just send
me word when he was ready for me to come And then his
plans just never worked out for him to send for me in time,
like he aimed. Going away among strangers like that, a
young fellow needs time to get settled down. He never
knowed that when he left, that he would need more time
to get settled down in than he figured on. Especially a
young fellow full of life like Lucas, that likes folks and
jollifying, and liked by folks in turn. He didn’t know it
would take longer than he planned, being young, and folks
always after him because he is a hand for laughing and jok-
ing, interfering with his work unbeknownst to him because
he never wanted to hurt folks’ feelings. And I wanted him
to have his last enjoyment, because marriage is different
with a young fellow, a lively young fellow, and a woman.
It lasts so long with a lively young fellow. Dont you think
so?”

Mrs Armstid does not answer. She looks at the other sit-
ting in the chair with her smooth hair and her still hands
lying upon her lap and her soft and musmg face. “Like as
not, he already sent me the word and it got lost on the way.
It’ s a right far piece from here to Alabama even, and I aint
to Jefferson yet. I told him I would not expect him to write,
being as he ain’t any hand for letters. Tou just send me
your mouthword when you are ready for me/ I told him.
Til be waiting/ It worried me a little at first, after he left,
because my name wasn’t Burch yet and my brother and his
folks not knowing Lucas as well as I knew him. How could
they?” Into* her face there comes slowly an expression of
soft and bright surprise, as if she had just thought of some-
thing which she had not even been aware that she did not
know. “How could they be expected to, you see. But he



18

had to get settled down first; it was him would have all the
tiouble of being among strangers, and me with nothing to
bother about except to just wait while he had all the bother
and trouble. But after a while I reckon I just got too busy
getting this chap up to his time to worry about what my
name was or what folks thought. But me and Lucas dont
need no word promises between us. It was something unex-
pected come up, or he even sent the word and it got lost.
So one day I just decided to up and not wait any longer. 9 "

"How did you know which way to go when you started?"

Lena is watching her hands. They are moving now, plait-
ing with rapt bemusement a fold of her skirt. It is not diffi-
dence, shyness. It is apparently some musing reflex of the
hand alone. “I just kept asking. With Lucas a lively young
fellow that got to know folks easy and quick, I knew that
wherever he had been, folks would remember him. So I kept
asking. And folks was right kind And sure enough, I heard
two days back on die road that he is in Jefferson, working
for the planing mill."

Mrs Armstid watches the lowered face. Her hands are
on her hips and she watches the younger woman with an
expression of cold and impersonal contempt "And you be-
lieve that he will be there when you get there. Granted that
he ever was there at all. That he will hear you are in the
same town with him, and still be there when the sun sets."

Lena's lowered face is grave, quiet. Her hand has ceased
now. It lies quite still on her lap, as if it had died there. Her
voice is quiet, tranquil, stubborn. "I reckon a family ought
\o all be together when a chap comes Specially the first
me. I reckon the Lord will see to that "

"And I reckon He will have to," Mrs Armstid says, sav-
agely, harshly. Armstid is m bed, his head propped up a
little, watching her across the footboard as, still dressed,
she stoops into the light of the lamp upon the dresser, hunt-



19

ing violently in a drawer. She produces a metal box and un-
locks it with a key suspended about her neck and takes out
a cloth sack whicn she opens and produces a small china
effigy of a rooster with a slot in its back. It jingles with
coins as she moves it and upends it and shakes it violently
above the top of the dresser, shaking from the slot coins in
a meagre dribbling. Armstid in the bed watches her.

"What are you fixing to do with your eggmoney this time
of night?” he says.

"I reckon it’s mine to do with what I like.” She stoops into
the lamp, her face harsh, bitter. "God knows it was me
sweated over them and nursed them. You never lifted no
hand”

"Sho,” he says. "I reckon it ain’t any human in this coun-
try is going to dispute them hens with you, lessen its
the possums and the snakes. That rooster bank, neither ” he
says. Because, stooping suddenly, she jerks off one shoe and
strikes the china bank a single shattering blow. From the
bed, reclining, Armstid watches her gather the remaining
coins from among the china fragments and drop them with
the others into the sack and knot it and reknot it three or
four times with savage finality.

""You give that to her ” she says. "And come sunup you
hitch up the team and take her away from here. Take her
all the way to Jefferson, if you want.”

"I reckon she can get a ride in from Varners store,” he
jays.

Mrs Armstid rose before day and cooked breakfast. It
was on the table when Armstid came in from milking. "Go
tell her to come and eat,” Mrs Armstid said. When he and
Lena returned to the kitchen, Mrs Armstid was not there.
Lena looked about the room once, pausing at the door with
less than a pause, her face already fixed in an expression
immanent with smiling, with speech, prepared speech. Arm-



20

stid knew But she said nothing, the pause was less than a
pause

“Let's eat and get on,” Armstid said. “You still got a right
good piece to go/' He watched her eat, again with the tran-
quil and hearty decorum of Iasi night's suppex, though there
was now corrupting it a quality of polite and almost finick-
ing restiamt. Then he gave her the knotted cloth sack. She
took it, her face pleased, warm, though not very much sur-
prised

“Why, it s right kind of her," she said. “But I wont need
it. I'm so nigh there now.”

“I reckon you better keep it I reckon you done noticed
how Martha amt much on being crossed m what she aims
to do”

“It s right kind,” Lena said She tied the money up in the
bandanna bundle and put on the sunbonnet. The wagon
was waiting. When they drove down the lane, past the
house, she looked back at it “It was right kind of you all ”
she said.

“She done it,” Armstid said “I reckon I can t claim no
credit.”

“It was right kind, anyway. You'll have to say goodbye
to her for me. I had hopened to see her myself, but . . .”

“Sho ” Armstid said. “I reckon she was busy or something.
Ill tell her”

They drove up to the store in the early sunlight, with
the squatting men already spitting across the heelgnawed
porch, watching her descend slowly and carefully from the
wagon seat, carrying the bundle and the fan. Again Arm-
stid did not move to assist her He said from the seat “This
here is Miz Burch. She wants to go to Jefferson. If anybody
is going m today, she will take it kind to ride with them.”

She reached the earth, m the heavy, dusty shoes. She
looked up at him, serene, peaceful. “Its been right kind ”
she said.



21

“Sho, Armstid said. “I reckon you can get to town now.”
He looked down at her. Then it seemed an interminable
while that he watched his tongue seek words, thinking quiet
and swift, thought fleeing A man All men . He will pass up
a hundred chances to do good for one chance to meddle
where meddling is not wanted . He will overlook and fail
to see chances , opportunities , for riches and fame and well-
doing, and even sometimes for evil. But he wont fail to see
a chance to meddle Then his tongue found words, he listen-
ing, perhaps with the same astonishment that she did: “Only
I wouldn’t set too much store by . . . store in . . think-
ing She is not listening If she could hear words like that
she would not he getting down from this wagon , with that
belly and that fan and that little bundle , alone , bound for a
place she never saw before and hunting for a man she aint
going to ever see again and that she has already seen one
time too many as it is “ — any time you are passing back this
way, tomorrow or even tonight . . *

“I reckon I’ll be all right now,” she said. “They told me he
is there.”

He turned the wagon and drove back home, sitting
hunched, bleacheyed, on the sagging seat, thinking, Tt
wouldn’t have done any good. She would not have believed
the telling and hearing it any more than she will believe the
thinking that’s been going on all around her for . . . It’s
four weeks now, she said. No more than she will feel it and
believe it now. Setting there on that top step, with her
hands in her lap and them fellows squatting there and spit-
ting past her into the road. And not even waiting for them
to ask her about it before she begins to tell. Telling them
of her own accord about that durn fellow like she never had
nothing particular to either hide or tell, even when Jody
Varner or some of them will tell her that that fellow in Jef-
ferson at the planing mill is named Bunch and not Burch;
and that not worrying her either. I reckon she knows more



22

than even Martha does, like when she told Martha las r
night about how the Lord will see that what is right will get
done/

It required only one or two questions. Then, sitting on
the top step, the fan and the bundle upon her lap, Lena
tells her story again, with that patient and transparent re-
capitulation of a lying child, the squatting overalled men
listening quietly.

"That fellow's name is Bunch,” Varner says. "He’s been
working there at the mill about seven years. How do you
know that Burch is there too?”

She is looking away up the road, in the direction of Jef-
ferson. Her face is calm, waiting, a little detached without
being bemused. "I reckon hell be there. At that planing mill
and all. Lucas always did like excitement. He never did
like to live quiet. That’s why it never suited him back at
Doane’s Mill. Why he — we decided to make a change: for
money and excitement.”

"For money and excitement,” Varner says. "Lucas aint
the first young buck that’s throwed over what he was bred
to do and them that depended on him doing it, for money
and excitement.”

But she is not listening apparently. She sits quietly on
the top step, watching the road where it curves away,
empty and mounting, toward Jefferson. The squatting men
along the wall look at her still and placid face and they
think as Armstid thought and as Varner thinks: that she is
thinking of a scoundrel who deserted her in trouble and
who they believe that she will never see again, save his
coattails perhaps already boardflat with running. "Or maybe
it’s about that Sloane’s or Bone’s Mill she is thinking,’ Var-
ner thinks. 1 reckon that even a fool gal don’t have to come
as far as Mississippi to find out that whatever place she run



23

from ain't going to be a whole lot different or worse than
the place she is at. Even if it has got a brother in it that
objects to his sister s nightprowling/ thinking I would have
done the same as the brother; the father would have done
the same » She has no mother because fatherblood hates
with love and pride ; but motherblood with hate loves and
cohabits

She is not thinking about this at all She is thinking about
the coins knotted in the bundle beneath her hands. She is
remembering breakfast, thinking how she can enter the
store this moment and buy cheese and crackers and even
sardines if she likes. At Armstid's she had had but a cup
of coffee and a piece of cornbread: nothing more, though
Armstid pressed her. 1 et polite/ she thinks, her hands lying
upon the bundle, knowing the hidden coins, remembering
the single cup of coffee, the decorous morsel of strange
bread; thinking with a sort of serene pride: ‘Like a lady I et
Like a lady travelling. But now I can buy sardines too if I
should so wish/

So she seems to muse upon the mounting road while the
slowspitting and squatting men watch her covertly, believ-
ing that she is thinking about the man and the approaching
crisis, when in reality she is waging a mild battle with that
providential caution of the old earth of and with and by
which she lives. This time she conquers. She rises and walk-
ing a little awkwardly, a little carefully, she traverses the
ranked battery of maneyes and enters the store, the clerk
following. Tm a-going to do it/ she thinks, even while or-
dering the cheese and crackers; Tm a-going to do it/ saying
aloud: "And a box of sardines/' She calls them sour-deens .
"A nickel box/'

"We ain't got no nickel sardines/' the clerk says. "Sardines
is fifteen cents/' He also calls them sour-deens .

She muses, "What have you got in a can for a nickel?'



24

“Aint got nothing except shoeblacldng. I dont reckon you
want that. Not to eat, noway”

“I reckon 111 take the fifteen cent ones, then.” She unties
the bundle and the knotted sack. It requires some time to
solve the knots. But she unties them patiently, one by one,
and pays and knots the sack and the bundle again and
takes up her purchase. When she emerges onto the porch
there is a wagon standing at the steps. A man is on the seat

“Here’s a wagon going to town,” they tell her. “He will
take you in ”

Her face wakes, serene, slow, warm. “Why, you’re right
kind,” she say s.

The wagon moves slowly, steadily, as if here within the
sunny loneliness of the enormous land it were outside of,
beyond all time and all haste. From Varner’s store to Jef-
ferson it is twelve miles. “Will we get there before dinner
time?” she says.

The driver spits. “We mought,” he says.

Apparently he has never looked at her, not even when
she got into the wagon. Apparently she has never looked
at him, either. She does not do so now, “I reckon you go to
Jefferson a right smart.”

He says, “Some.” The wagon creaks on. Fields and woods
seem to hang in some inescapable middle distance, at once
static and fluid, quick, like mirages. Yet the wagon passes
them.

“I reckon you don’t know anybody in Jefferson named
Lucas Burch ”

“Burch?”

“I’m looking to meet him there. He works at the planing
mill.”

“No,” the driver says “I don’t know that I know him.
But hkely there is a right smart of folks in Jefferson I don’t
know. Likely he is there.”



25

"Til declare, I hope so. Travelling is getting right bother-
some/'

The driver does not look at her. "How far have you come,
looking for him^”

"From Alabama. It's a right far piece.”

He does not look at her. His voice is quite casual "How
did your folks come to let you start out, in your shape?”

“My folks are dead. I live with my brother. I just decided
to come on.”

“I see. He sent you word to come to Jefferson.”

She does not answer. He can see beneath the sunbonnet
her calm profile. The wagon goes on, slow, timeless. The
red and unhurried miles unroll beneath the steady feet of
the mules, beneath the creaking and clanking wheels. The
sun stands now high overhead; the shadow of the sunbon-
net now falls across her lap. She looks up at the sun. “I
leckon it's time to eat,” she says. He watches from the cor-
ner of his eye as she opens the cheese and crackers and the
sardines and offers them.

“I wouldn’t care for none,” he says

“I'd take it kind for you to share.”

“I wouldn’t care to. You go ahead and eat.”

She begins to eat. She eats slowly, steadily, sucking the
rich sardine oil from her fingers with slow and complete
# relish Then she stops, not abruptly, yet with utter com-
pleteness, her jaw stilled in midchewing, a bitten cracker
in her hand and her face lowered a little and her eyes blank,
as if she were listening to something very far away or so
near as to be inside her. Her face has drained of color, of
its full, hearty blood, and she sits quite still, hearing and
feeling the implacable and immemorial earth, but without
fear or alarm. Tt’s twins at least/ she says to herself, with-
out lip movement, without sound. Then the spasm passes.
She eats again. The wagon has not stopped; time has not
stopped. The wagon crests the final hill and they see smoke.



26


‘‘Jefferson/’ the driver says,

“Well, I’ll declare/’ she says. ‘We are almost there, aint
we?”

It is the man now who does not hear. He is looking
ahead, across the valley toward the town on the opposite
ridge. Following his pointing whip, she sees two columns
of smoke: the one the heavy density of burning coal above
a tall stack, the other a tall yellow column standing appar-
ently from among a clump of trees some distance beyond
the town. "That’s a house burning,” the driver says. "See?"

But she in turn again does not seem to be listening, to
hear. "My, my,” she says; "here I aint been on the road but
four weeks, and now I am in Jefferson already. My, my, A
body does get around.”



2


BYRON BUNCH KNOWS THIS: IT WAS ONE FRIDAY MORNING

three years ago. And the group of men at work m the planer
shed looked up, and saw the stranger standing there, watch-
ing them. They did not know how long he had been there.
He looked like a tramp, yet not like a tiamp either. His
shoes were dusty and his trousers were soiled too. But they
were of decent serge, sharply creased, and his shirt was
soiled but it was a white shirt, and he wore a tie and a stiff-
brim straw hat that was quite new, cocked at an angle arro-
gant and baleful above his still face. He did not look like a
professional hobo m his professional rags, but there was
something definitely rootless about him, as though no town
nor city was his, no street, no walls, no square of earth his
home. And that he carried his knowledge with him always
as though it were a banner, with a quality ruthless, lonely,
and almost proud. ""As if,” as the men said later, ""he was just
down on his luck for a time, and that he didn’t intend to
stay down on it and didn’t give a damn much how he rose
up.” He was young. And Byron watched him standing there
and looking at the men in sweatstained overalls, with a ciga-
rette in one side of his mouth and his face darkly and con-
temptuously still, drawn down a little on one side because

27



28


of the smoke After a while he spat the cigarette without
touching his hand to it and turned and went on to the
mill office while the men m faded and woiksoiled overalls
looked at his back with a sort of baffled outrage. "We ought
to run him through the planer,” the foreman said "Maybe
that will take that look off his face.”

They did not know who he was. None of them had ever
seen him before "Except that's a pretty risky look for a man
to wear on his face m public,” one said. "He might forget
and use it somewhere where somebody wont like it.” Then
they dismissed him, from the talk, anyway. They went back
to their work among the whirring and grating belts and
shafts But it was not ten minutes before the mill superin-
tendent entered, with the stranger behind him.

'Tut this man on,” the superintendent said to the fore-
man. "He says he can handle a scoop, anyhow. You can put
him on the sawdust pile.”

The others had not stopped work, yet there was not a
man in the shed who was not again watching the stranger
in his soiled city clothes, with his dark, insufferable face
and his whole air of cold and quiet contempt. The foreman
looked at him, briefly, his gaze as cold as the others. "Is he
going to do it in them clothes?”

"That's his business,” the superintendent said. *Tm not
hiring his clothes.”

"Well, whatever he wears suits me if it suits you and him,”
the foreman said. "All right, mister,” he said. "Go down yon-
der and get a scoop and help them fellows move that saw-
dust.”

The newcomer turned without a word. The others
watched him go down to the sawdust pile and vanish and
reappear with a shovel and go to work. The foreman and
the superintendent were talking at the door. They parted
and the foreman returned. "His name is Christmas,” he said.

"His name is what?” one said.



29


"Christmas.”

"Is he a foreigner' 5 ”

"Did you ever hear of a white man named Christmas?”
the foreman said.

"I never heard of nobody a-tall named it : the other said.

And that was the first time Byron remembered that he
had ever thought how a mans name, which is supposed to
be just the sound for who he is, can be somehow an augur
of what he will do, if other men can only read the meaning
in time. It seemed to him that none of them had looked
especially at the stranger until they heard his name. But as
soon as they heard it, it was as though there was something
in the sound of it that was trying to tell them what to ex-
pect; that he carried with him his own inescapable warning,
like a flower its scent or a rattlesnake its rattle. Only none of
them had sense enough to recognise it. They just thought
that he was a foreigner, and as they watched him for the
rest of that Friday, working in that tie and the straw hat
and the creased trousers, they said among themselves that
that was the way men in his country worked; though there
were others who said, "Hell change clothes tonight. He
wont have on them Sunday clothes when he comes to work
in the morning.”

Saturday morning came. As the late arrivals came up just
before the whistle blew, they were already saying, "Did he
— Where — ■” The others pointed. The new man was stand-
ing alone down at the sawdust pile. His shovel was beside
him, and he stood in the same garments of yesterday, with
the arrogant hat, smoking a cigarette. "He was there when
we come,” the first ones said. "Just standing there, like that.
Like he hadn’t never been to bed, even.”

He did not talk to any of them at all. And none of them
tried to talk to him. But they were all conscious of him, of
the steady back (he worked well enough, with a kind of
baleful and restrained steadiness) and arms. Noon came



30


With the exception of Byron, they had brought no lunch
with them today, and they began to gather up their be-
longings preparatory to quitting until Monday. Byron went
alone with his lunch pail to the pump house where they
usually ate, and sat down. Then something caused him to
look up. A short distance away the stranger was leaning
against a post, smoking. Byron knew that he had been there
when he entered, and would not even bother to go away.
Or worse, that he had come there deliberately, ignoring
Byron as if he were another post. “Aint you going to knock
off?” Byron said.

The other expelled smoke. Then he looked at Byron. His
face was gaunt, the flesh a level dead parchment color. Not
the skin: the flesh itself, as though the skull had been
molded in a still and deadly regularity and then baked in
a fierce oven. “How much do they pay for overtime?” he
said. And then Byron knew. He knew then why the other
worked in the Sunday clothes, and why he had had no
lunch with him either yesterday or today, and why he had
not quit with the others at noon. He knew as well as if the
man had told him that he did not have a nickel in his
pockets and that in all likelihood he had lived on cigarettes
for two or three days now. Almost with the thought Byron
was offering his own pail, the action as reflex as the thought
Because before the act was completed the man, without
changing his indolent and contemptuous attitude, turned
his face and looked once at the proffered pail through the
drooping smoke of the cigarette. “I aint hungry. Keep your
muck.”

Monday morning came and Byron proved himself right.
The man came to work in new overalls, and with a paper
bag of food. But he did not squat with them in the pump
house to eat at noon, and the look was still on his face. “Let
it stay there,” the foreman said. “Simms aint hiring his face
any more than his clothes.”



31

Simms hadn’t hired the stranger s tongue, either, Byron
thought. At least, Christmas didn’t seem to think so, to act
so. He still had nothing to say to anyone, even after six
months. No one knew what he did between mill hours. Now
and then one of his fellow workers would pass him on the
square down town after supper, and it would be as though
Christmas had never seen the other before. He would be
wearing then the new hat and the ironed trousers and the
cigarette in one side of his mouth and the smoke sneering
across his face. No one knew where he lived, slept at night,
save that now and then someone would see him following
a path that came up through the woods on the edge of
town, as if he might live out that way somewhere.

This is not what Byron knows now. This is just what he
knew then, what he heard and watched as it came to his
knowledge. None of them knew then where Christmas lived
and what he was actually doing behind the veil, the screen,
of his Negro’s job at the mill. Possibly no one would ever
have known if it had not been for the other stranger. Brown,
But as soon as Brown told, there were a dozen men who ad-
mitted having bought whiskey from Christmas for over two
years, meeting him at night and alone in the woods behind
an old colonial plantation house two miles from town, in
which a middleaged spinster named Burden lived alone.
But even the ones who bought the whiskey did not know
that Christmas was actually hving in a tumbledown Negro
cabin on Miss Burden’s place, and that he had been living
in it for more than two years.

Then one day about six months ago another stranger ap-
peared at the mill as Christmas had done, seeking work.
He was young too, tall, already in overalls which looked as
though he had been in them constantly for some time, and
he looked as though he had been travelling light also. He
had an alert, weakly handsome face with a small white scar
beside the mouth that looked as if it had been contemplated



32

a great deal in the mirror, and a way of jerking his head
quickly and glancmg over his shoulder like a mule does in
front of an automobile m die road, Byron thought. But it
was not alone backwatchmg, alarm, it seemed also to Byron
to possess a quality of assurance, brass, as though the man
were reiteratmg and insisting all the while that he was
afraid of nothing that might or could approach him from
behind. And when Mooney, the foreman, saw die new hand,
Byron believed that he and Mooney had the same thought
Mooney said. "Well, Simms is safe from hiring anything at
all when he put that fellow on. He never even hired a whole
pair of pants."

"Thads so," Byron said “He puts me m mmd of one of
these cars running along the street with a radio in it. You
cant make out what it is saying and the car amt going any-
where in particular and when you look at it close you see
that there aint even anybody m it.”

Wes ” Mooney said. “He puts me in mmd of a horse. Not
a mean horse. Just a worthless horse Looks fine in the pas-
ture, but it's always down in the spring bottom when any-
body comes to the gate with a bridle. Runs fast, all right,
but ids always got a sore hoof when hitchmg-up time
comes.”

"But I reckon maybe the mares like him,” Byron said.

"Sho,” Mooney said. “I don’t reckon he’d do even a mare
any permanent harm.”

The new hand went to work down in the sawdust pile
with Christmas. With a lot of motion to it, telling everybody
who he was and where he had been, in a tone and manner
that was the essence of the man himself, that carried within
itself its own confounding and mendacity. So that a man
put no more belief in what he said that he had done than
in what he said his name was, Byron thought. There was no
reason why his name should not have been Brown It was



33

that, looking at him, a man would know that at some time
in his life he would reach some crisis in his own foolishness
when he would change his name, and that he would think
of Brown to change it to with a kind of gleeful exultation,
as though the name had never been invented. The thing
was, there was no reason why he should have had or have
needed any name at all. Nobody cared, just as Byron be-
lieved that no one (wearing pants, anyway) cared where
he came from nor where he went nor how long he stayed.
Because wherever he came from and wherever he had been,
a man knew that he was just living on the country, like a
locust. It was as though he had been domg it for so long
now that all of him had become scattered and diffused and
now there was nothing left but the transparent and weight-
less shell blown oblivious and without destination upon
whatever wind.

He worked some, though, after a fashion. Byron believed
that there was not even enough left of him to do a good,
shrewd job of shirking. To desire to shirk, even, since a man
must be better than common to do a good job of malinger-
ing, the same as a good job at anything else; of stealing
and murdering even. He must be aiming at some specific
and definite goal, working toward it. And he believed that
Brown was not. They heard how he went and lost his entire
first weeks pay in a crap game on the first Saturday night.
Byron said to Mooney; “I am surprised at that. I would
have thought that maybe shooting dice would be the one
thing he could do”

"Him?” Mooney said. "What makes you think that he
could be good at any kind of devilment when he ain’t any
good at anything as easy as shovelling sawdust? that he
could fool anybody with anything as hard to handle as a
pair of dice, when he can t with anything as easy to handle
as a scoop?” Then he said, "Well, I reckon there ain't any



34

man so sorry he can't beat somebody doing something. Be-
cause he can at least beat that Christmas doing nothing at

air

“Sho," Byron said, “I reckon that being good is about the
easiest thing in the world for a lazy man/'

“I reckon he'd be bad fast enough/' Mooney said, “if he
just had somebody to show him how/'

“Well, he'll find that fellow somewhere, sooner or later/'
Byron said. They both turned and looked down at the
sawdust pile, where Brown and Christmas labored, the one
with that brooding and savage steadiness, the other with a
higharmed and erratic motion which could not have been
fooling even itself.

“I reckon so/' Mooney said, “But if I aimed to be bad. I'd
sho hate to have him for my partner."

Like Christmas, Brown came to work in the same clothes
which he wore on the street. But unlike Christmas, he made
no change in his costume for some time. “He'll win just
enough m that crap game some Saturday night to buy a
new suit and still have fifty cents in nickels to rattle in his
pocket," Mooney said. “And on the next Monday morning
we aint going to see him again." Meanwhile Brown contin-
ued to come to work in the same overalls and shirt in which
he had arrived in Jefferson, losing his week's pay in the
Saturday night dice game or perhaps winning a little, greet-
ing either the one or the other with the same shouts of im-
becile laughter, joking and chaffing with the very men who
in all likelihood were periodically robbing him. Then one
day they heard that he had won sixty dollars. “Well, that's
the last we'll see of him/' one said.

“I dont know," Mooney said, “Sixty dollars is the wrong
figure. If it had been either ten dollars or five hundred, I
reckon you’d be right. But not just sixty. He'll ]ust feel now
that he is settled down good here, drawing at last some-
where about what he is worth a week." And on Monday he



85

did return to work, in the overalls; they saw them. Brown
and Christmas, down at the sawdust pile. They had been
watching the two of them down there from the day when
Brown went to work: Christmas jabbing his shovel into the
sawdust slowly and steadily and hard, as though he were
chopping up a buried snake ("or a man/ 9 Mooney said)
and Brown leaning on his shovel while he apparently told
Christmas a story, an anecdote. Because presently he would
laugh, shout with laughter, his head backflung, while beside
him the other man worked with silent and unflagging sav-
ageness. Then Brown would fall to again, working for a
time once again as fast as Christmas, but picking up less
and less in the scoop until at last the shovel would not even
touch the sawdust in its flagging arc. Then he would lean
upon it again and apparently finish whatever it was that he
was telling Christmas, telling to the man who did not even
seem to hear his voice. As if the other were a mile away, or
spoke a different language from the one he knew, Byron
thought. And they would be seen together down town on
Saturday evening sometimes: Christmas in his neat, soberly
austere serge-and-white and the straw hat, and Brown in
his new suit (it was tan, with a red crisscross, and he had a
colored shirt and a hat like Christmas* but with a colored
band) talking and laughing, his voice heard clear across
the square and back again in echo, somewhat as a mean-
ingless sound in a church seems to come from everywhere
at once. Like he aimed for everybody to see how he and
Christmas were buddies, Byron thought And then Christ-
mas would turn and with that still, sullen face of his walk
out of whatever small gathering the sheer empty sound of
Brown s voice had surrounded them with, with Brown fol-
lowing, still laughing and talking. And each time the other
workmen would say, "Well, he wont be back on the fob
Monday morning” But each Monday he was back. It was
Christmas who quit first.



36


He quit one Saturday night, without warning, after al-
most three years. It was Brown who informed them that
Christmas had quit, Some of the other workers were family
men and some were bachelors and they were of different
ages and they led a catholic variety of lives, yet on Monday
morning they all came to work with a kind of gravity, al-
most decorum. Some of them were young, and they drank
and gambled on Saturday night, and even went to Mem-
phis now and then. Yet on Monday morning they came
quietly and soberly to work, in clean overalls and clean
shirts, waiting quietly until the whistle blew and then going
quietly to work, as though there were still something of
Sabbath in the overlingermg air which established a tenet
that, no matter what a man had done with his Sabbath, to
come quiet and clean to work on Monday morning was no
more than seemly and right to do.

That is what they had always remarked about Brown,
On Monday morning as likely as not he would appear in
the same soiled clothes of last week, and with a black stub-
ble that had known no razor. And he would be more noisy
than ever, shouting and playing the pranks of a child of
ten. To the sober others it did not look right. To them it
was as though he had arrived naked, or drunk. Hence it
was Brown who on this Monday morning notified them
that Christmas had quit He arrived late, but that was not
it He hadn't shaved, either; but that was not it. He was
quiet For a time they did not know that he was even pres-
ent, who by that time should have had half the men there
cursing him, and some in good earnest. He appeared just
as the whistle blew and went straight to the sawdust pile
and went to work without a word to anyone, even when
one man spoke to him. And then they saw that he was
down there alone, that Christmas, his partner, was not
there. When the foreman came m, one said; "Well, I see
you have lost one of your apprentice firemen *



37

Mooney looked down to where Brown was spading into
the sawdust pile as though it were eggs. He spat briefly.

“Yes. He got rich too fast. This little old job couldn't hoM
him.”

“Got rich?” another said

“One of them did,” Mooney said, still watching Brown
“I saw them yesterday riding in a new car. He” — he jerked
his head toward Brown — “was driving it. I wasn't surprised
at that. I am just surprised that even one of them come to
work today.”

‘Well, I don't reckon Simms will have any trouble finding
a man to fill his shoes in these times,” the other said.

“He wouldn't have any trouble domg that at any time,”
Mooney said.

“It looked to me like he was doing pretty well.”

“Oh,” Mooney said. “I see. You are talking about Christ-
mas ”

“Who were you talking about? Has Brown said he is quit-
ting too?”

“You reckon he's going to stay down there, working, with
the other one riding around town all day in that new car? 1 "

“Oh.” The other looked at Brown too. “I wonder where
they got that car.”

“I don't,” Mooney said. “What I wonder is, if Brown is
going to quit at noon or work on until six o'clock.”

“Well,” Byron said, “if I could get rich enough out here
to buy a new automobile, I'd quit too.”

One or two of the others looked at Byron. They smiled
a little. “They never got that rich out here,” one said. Byron
looked at him. “I reckon Byron stays out of meanness too
much himself to keep up with other folks',” the other said.
They looked at Byron. “Brown is what you might call a
' public servant Christmas used to make them come way out
to them woods back of Miss Burden's place, at night; now
Brown brings it right into town for them. I hear tell how if



38

you just know the pass word, you can buy a pint of whiskey
out of his shirt front m any alley on a Saturday night.”

“What’s the pass word?” another said. “Six bits?”

Byron looked from face to face. “Is that a fact? Is that
what they are doing?”

“Thats what Brown is doing. I don’t know about Christ-
mas. I wouldn’t swear to it. But Brown aint going to be far
away from where Christmas is at. Like to like, as the old
folks say.”

“That’s a fact,” another said. “Whether Christinas is in it
or not, I reckon we aint going to know. He aint going to
walk around in public with his pants down, like Brown
does”

“He aint going to need to,” Mooney said, looking at
Brown.

And Mooney was right. They watched Brown until noon,
down there at the sawdust pile by himself. Then the whistle
blew and they got their lunch pails and squatted m the
pump shed and began to eat. Brown came in, glum, his
face at once sullen and injured looking, like a child’s,
and squatted among them, his hands dangling between his
knees. He had no lunch with him today.

“Amt you going to eat any dinner?” one said.

“Cold muck out of a dirty lard bucket?” Brown said.
“Starting in at daylight and slaving all day like a dura
rigger, with a hour off at noon to eat cold muck out of a
fin bucket.”

"Well, maybe some folks work like the niggers work
vhere they come from,” Mooney said. “But a nigger
wouldn’t last till the noon whistle, working on this job
like some white folks work on it.”

But Brown did not seem to hear, to be listening, squat-
ting with his sullen face and his dangling hands. It was as
though he were not listening to any save himself, listening
to himself; “A fool. A man is a fool that will do it.”



89

"You are not chained to that scoop * Mooney said.

“You dum right I aint,” Brown said.

Then the whistle blew. They went back to work. They
watched Brown down at the sawdust pile. He would dig for
a while, then he would begin to slow, moving slower and
slower until at last he would be clutching the shovel as
though it were a riding whip, and they could see that he
was talking to himself. “Because there aint nobody else
down there for him to tell it to,” one said.

“It’s not that,” Mooney said. “He hasn’t quite convinced
himself yet. He aint quite sold yet.”

“Sold on what?”

“On the idea that he’s a bigger fool than even I think he
is,” Mooney said.

The next morning he did not appear. “His address from
now on will be the barbershop,” one said.

“Or that alley just behind it,” another said.

“I reckon we’ll see him once more,” Mooney said. “Hell
be out here once more to draw his time for yesterday ”

Which he did. About eleven o’clock he came up. He wore
now the new suit and the straw hat, and he stopped at the
shed and stood there looking at the working men as Christ-
mas had done on that day three years ago, as if somehow
the very attitudes of the master’s dead life motivated, un-
awares to him, the willing muscles of the disciple who had
learned too quick and too well. But Brown merely con-
trived to look scattered and emptily swaggering where the
master had looked sullen and quiet and fatal as a snake.
“Lay into it, you slaving bastards!” Brown said, in a merry,
loud voice cropped with teeth.

Mooney looked at Brown. Then Browns teeth didn’t
show. “You aint calling me that,” Mooney said, “are you?”

Brown’s mobile face performed one of those instantane*
ous changes which they knew. Like it was so scattered and
so lightly built that it wasn’t any trouble for even him to



40


hange it, Byron thought. "I wasn’t talking to you ” Brown
aid.

"Oh, I see.” Mooney’s tone was quite pleasant, easy. "It
*/as these other fellows you were calling a bastard.”

Immediately a second one said: "Were you calling that
^t. me?”

"I was just talking to myself,” Brown said,

"Well, you have told God’s truth for once in your life,”
Mooney said. "The half of it, that is. Do you want me to
come up there and whisper the other half in your ear?”

And that was the last they saw of him at the mill, though
Byron knows and remembers now the new car (with pres-
ently a crumpled fender or two ) about the town, idle, des-
tinationless, and constant, with Brown lolling behind the
wheel and not making a very good job of being dissolute
and enviable and idle. Now and then Christmas would be
with him, but not often. And it is now no secret what they
were doing. It is a byword among young men and even
hoys that whiskey can be bought from Biown almost on
sight, and the town is just waiting foi him to get caught,
to produce from his raincoat and offer to sell it to an under-
cover man They still do not know for certain if Christmas
is connected with it, save that no one believes that Brown
alone has sense enough to make a profit even from boot-
legging, and some of them know that Christmas and Brown
both live in a cabin on the Bui den place. But even these do
not know if Miss Burden knows it or not, and if they did,
they would not tell her. She lives m the big house alone, a
woman of middleage She has lived m the house since she
was bom, yet she is still a stranger, a foreigner whose peo-
ple moved in from the North during Reconstruction. A Yan-
kee, a lover of Negroes, about whom in the town there is
still talk of queer relations with Negroes in the town and out
of it, despite the fact that it is now sixty years since her
grandfather and her brother were killed on the square by



41

an exslaveowner over a question of Negro votes in a state
election. But it still lingers about her and about the place,
something dark and outlandish and threatful, even though
she is but a woman and but the descendant of them whom
the ancestors of the town had reason (or thought that they
had) to hate and dread. But it is there: the descendants of
both in their relationship to one another ghosts, with be-
tween them the phantom of the old spilled blood and the
old horror and anger and fear.

If there had been love once, man or woman would have
said that Byron Bunch had forgotten her. Or she (meaning
love) him, more like — that small man who will not see
thirty again, who has spent six days of every week for seven
years at the planing mill, feeding boards into the machim
ery. Saturday afternoons too he spends there, alone now,
with the other workmen all down town in their Sunday
clothes and neckties, in that terrific and aimless and restive
idleness of men who labor.

On these Saturday afternoons he loads the finished boards
into freight cars, since he cannot operate the planer alone,
keeping his own time to the final second of an imaginary
whistle. The other workmen, the town itself or that part
of it which remembers or thinks about him, believe that
he does it for the overtime which he receives. Perhaps this
is the reason. Man knows so little about his fellows. In his
eyes all men or women act upon what he believes would
motivate him if he were mad enough to do what that other
man or woman is doing. In fact, there is but one man in
the town who could speak with any certainty about Bunch,
and with this man the town does not know that Bunch has
any intercourse, since they meet and talk only at night. This
mans name is Hightower. Twenty-five years ago he was '
minister of one of the principal churches, perhaps the prin-
cipal church This man alone knows where Bunch goes each



42

Saturday evening when the imaginary whistle blows (or
when Bunch’s huge silver watch says that it has blown).
Mrs. Beard, at whose boarding house Bunch lives, knows
only that shortly after six o’clock each Saturday Bunch en-
ters, bathes and changes to a suit of cheap seige which is
not new, eats his supper and saddles the mule which he
stables in a shed behind the house which Bunch himself
patched up and roofed, and departs on the mule. She does
not know where he goes. It is the minister Hightower alone
who knows that Bunch rides thirty miles into the country
and spends Sunday leading the choir in a country church —
a service which lasts all day long. Then some time around
midnight he saddles the mule again and rides back to Jef-
ferson at a steady, allnight jog. And on Monday morning,
in his clean overalls and shirt he will be on hand at the mill
when the whistle blows. Mrs. Beard knows only that from
Saturday’s supper to Monday’s breakfast each week his
room and the mule’s homemade stable will be vacant. High-
tower alone knows where he goes and what he does there,
because two or three nights a week Bunch visits Hightower
in the small house where the exminister lives alone, in what
die town calls his disgrace — the house unpainted, small,
obscure, poorly lighted, mansmelling, manstale. Here the
two of them sit in the minister's study, talking quietly: the
slight, nondescript man who is utterly unaware that he is
a man of mystery among his fellow workers, and the fifty-
year-old outcast who has been denied by his church.

Then Byron fell m love. He fell in love contrary to all the
tradition of his austere and jealous country raising which
demands in the object physical inviolability. It happens on
a Saturday afternoon while he is alone at the mill. Two
miles away the house is still burning, the yellow smoke
standing straight as a monument on the horizon. They saw
it before noon, when the smoke first rose above the trees,
before the whistle blew and the others departed. “I reckon



4S

Byronll quit too, today,” they said. ‘With a free fire to
watch ”

"It's a big fire/" another said. "What can it be? I dont re-
member anything out that way big enough to make all that
smoke except that Burden house.”

"Maybe that’s what it is” another said. "My pappy says
he can remember how fifty years ago folks said it ought to
be burned, and with a little human fat meat to start it
good.”

"Maybe your pappy slipped out there and set it afire,” a
third said. They laughed. Then they went back to work,
waiting for the whistle, pausing now and then to look at
the smoke. After a while a truck loaded with logs drove in.
They asked the truck driver, who had come through town.

"Burden,” the driver said. "Yes. That’s the name. Some-
body in town said that the sheriff had gone out there too.’*

"Well, I reckon Watt Kennedy likes to watch a fire, even
if he does have to take that badge with him,” one said.

"From the way the square looks,” the driver said, "he
wont have much trouble finding anybody he wants out
there to arrest,”

The noon whistle blew. The others departed. Byron ate
his lunch, the silver watch open beside him. When it said
one o’clock, he went back to work. He was alone in the
loading shed, making his steady and interminable journeys
between the shed and the car, with a piece of folded tow
sack upon his shoulder for a pad and bearing upon the pad
stacked burdens of staves which another would have said
he could not raise nor carry, when Lena Grove walked into
the door behind him, her face already shaped with serene
anticipatory smiling, her mouth already shaped upon a
name. He hears her and turns and sees her face fade like
the dying agitation of a dropped pebble in a spring.

"You aint him,” she says behind her fading smile, with>
the grave astonishment of a child.



44

“No, ma’am/’ Byron says He pauses, half turning with
the balanced staves “I dont reckon I am. Who is it I aint?”

‘"Lucas Burch. They told me — ”

""Lucas Burch?”

""They told me I would find him out here/ 7 She speaks
with a kind of serene suspicion, watching him without
blinking, as if she believes that he is trying to trick her.
‘"When I got close to town they kept a-calling it Bunch in-
stead of Burch. But I just thought they was saying it wrong.
Or maybe I just heard it wrong. 77

""Yes, ma’am/ 7 he says ""That’s what it is: Bunch. Byron
Bunch.” With the staves still balanced on his shoulder he
looks at her, at her swollen body, her heavy loins, at the
red dust upon the man’s heavy shoes upon her feet. ""Are
you Miz Burch?”

She does not answer at once. She stands there just inside
the door, watching him intently but without alarm, with
that untroubled, faintly baffled, faintly suspicious gaze.
Her eyes are quite blue But m them is that shadow of the
belief that he is trying to deceive her. ""They told me away
back on the road that Lucas is working at the planing mill
in Jefferson* Lots of them told me. And I got to Jefferson
and they told me where the planing mill was, and I asked
in town about Lucas Burch and they said, "Maybe you
mean Bunch 7 ; and so I thought they had just got the name
wrong and so it wouldn’t make any difference. Even when
they told me the man they meant wasn’t dark complected.
You aint telling me you dont know Lucas Burch out here/ 7

Byron puts down the load of staves, in a neat stack, ready
to be taken up again. ""No, ma’am. Not out here. Not no
Lucas Burch out here. And I know all the folks that work
here. He may work somewheie in town. Or at another mill.”

""Is there another planing mill?”

""No, ma’am. There’s some sawmills, a right smart of them,
though.”



45

She watches him. “They told me back down the road
that he worked for the planing mill.”

“I dont know of any here by that name,” Byron says. “I
dont recall none named Burch except me, and my name is
Bunch.”

She continues to watch him with that expression not so
much concerned for the future as suspicious of the now.
Then she breathes. It is not a sigh: she just breathes deeply
and quietly once. “Well,” she says. She half turns and
glances about, at the sawn boards, the stacked staves. “I
reckon I’ll set down a while. It’s right tiring, walking over
them hard streets from town. It seems hke walking out here
from town tired me more than all that way from Alabama
did.” She is moving toward a low stack of planks.

“Wait,” Byron says. He almost springs forward, slipping
the sack pad from his shoulder. The woman arrests herself
in the act of sitting and Byron spreads the sack on the
planks. “You’ll set easier.”

“Why, you’re right kind.” She sits down.

“I reckon it’ll set a little easier,” Byron says. He takes
from his pocket the silver watch and looks at it, then he too
sits, at the other end of the stack of lumber. “I reckon five
minutes will be about right.”

“Five minutes to rest?” she says.

“Five minutes from when you come in. It looks like I
done already started resting. I keep my own time on Satur-
day evenings,” he says.

“And every time you stop for a minute, you keep a count
of it? How will they know you stopped? A few minutes
wouldn’t make no difference, would it?”

“I reckon I aint paid for setting down,” he says. “So you
come from Alabama.”

She tells him, in his turn, sitting on the towsack pad,
heavybodied, her face quiet and tranquil, and he watching
her as quietly; telling him more than she knows that she



46

is telling, as she has been doing now to the strange faces
among whom she has travelled for four weeks with the un-
troubled unhaste of a change of season. And Byron in his
turn gets the picture of a young woman betrayed and de-
serted and not even aware that she has been deserted, and
whose name is not yet Burch.

"No, I dont reckon I know him / 9 he says at last "There
aint anybody but me out here this evening, anyway. The
rest of them are all out yonder at that fire, more than like.”
He shows her the yellow pillar of smoke standing tall and
Windless above the trees.

"We could see it from the wagon before we got to town,”
she says. "It's a right big fire.”

"Its a right big old house. It's been there a long time.
Dont nobody live in it but one lady, by herself. I reckon
there are folks in this town will call it a judgment on her,
even now. She is a Yankee. Her folks come down here in
the Reconstruction, to stir up the niggers. Two of them got
killed doing it. They say she is still mixed up with niggers.
Visits them when they are sick, like they was white. Wont
have a cook because it would have to be a nigger cook.
Folks say she claims that niggers are the same as white
folks. That's why folks dont never go out there. Except
one.” She is watching him, listening. Now he does not look
at her, looking a little aside. "Or maybe two, from what I
hear, I hope they was out there in time to help her move
her furniture out. Maybe they was.”

"Maybe who was?”

"Two fellows named Joe that live out that way some-
where. Joe Christmas and Joe Brown ”

"Joe Christmas? That's a funny name.”

"Hes a funny fellow.” Again he looks a little aside from
her interested face. "His partner s a sight, too. Brown. He
used fo work here too. But they done quit now, both of
them. Which amt nobody's loss, I reckon.”



47

The woman sits on the towsack pad, interested, tranquil.
The two of them might be sitting in their Sunday clothes,
in splint chairs on the patinasmooth earth before a country
cabin on a Sabbath afternoon. "Is his partner named Joe
too?”

"Yes, ma'am, Joe Brown. But I reckon that may be his
right name. Because when you think of a fellow named
Joe Brown, you think of a bigmouthed fellow thafs always
laughing and talking loud. And so I reckon that is his right
name, even if Joe Brown does seem a little kind of too quick
and too easy for a natural name, somehow. But I reckon it
is his, all right. Because if he drew time on his mouth, he
would be owning this here mill right this minute. Folks
seem to like him, though. Him and Christmas get along,
anyway.”

She is watching him. Her face is still serene, but now it
is quite grave, her eyes quite grave and quite intent. "What
do him and the other one do?”

"Nothing they hadn’t ought to, I reckon. At least, they
aint been caught at it yet. Brown used to work here, some;
what time he had off from laughing and playing jokes on
folks. But Christmas has retired. They live out yonder to-
gether, out there somewhere where that house is burning.
And I have heard what they do to make a living. But that
aint none of my business in the first place. And*in the sec-
ond place, most of what folks tells on other folks aint true
to begin with. And so I reckon I aint no better than nobody
else”

She is watching him. She is not even blinking. "And he
says his name is Brown ” It might have been a question, but
she does not wait for an answer. "What kind of tales have
you heard about what they do?”

"I would injure no man,” Byron says. "I reckon I ought
not to talk so much. For a fact, it looks like a fellow is
hound to get into mischief soon as he quits working”



48

<c What kind of tales?” she says. She has not moved. Her
tone is quiet, but Byron is already in love, though he does
not yet know it. tie does not look at her, feeling her grave,
intent gaze upon his face, his mouth.

“Some claim they are selling whiskey. Keeping it hid out
there where that house is burning. And theie is some tale
about Brown was drunk down town one Saturday night
and he pretty near told something that ought not to been
told, about him and Chiistmas in Memphis one night, or
on a dark road close to Memphis, that had a pistol in it.
Maybe two pistols Because Christmas come in quick and
shut Brown up and took him away Something that Christ-
mas didn’t want told, anyway, and that even Biown would
have had better sense than to told if he hadn’t been drunk.
That’s what I heard. I wasn’t there, myself.” When he raises
his face now he finds that he has looked down again before
he even met her eyes. He seems to have already a fore-
knowledge of something now irrevocable, not to be re-
called, who had believed that out here at the mill alone on
Saturday afternoon he would be where the chance to do
hurt or harm could not have found him.

"What does he look like?” she says.

""Christmas? Why — ”

""I don’t mean Christmas.”

“Oh. Brown. Yes. Tall, young. Dark complected; women-
folks calls him handsome, a right smart do, I hear tell. A
big hand for laughing and frolicking and playing jokes on
folks But I . . .” His voice ceases. He cannot look at her,
feeling her steady, sober gaze upon his face.

""Joe Brown,” she says ""Has he got a little white scar right
here by his mouth?”

And he cannot look at her, and he sits there on the
stacked lumber when it is too late, and he could have bitten
his tongue in two.



FROM HIS STUDY WINDOW HE CAN SEE THE ST REE T. IT IS NOT

far away, since the lawn is not deep. It is a small lawn, con-
taming a half dozen lowgrowing maples. The house, the
brown, unpainted and unobtrusive bungalow is small too
and by bushing crape myrtle and syringa and Althea al-
most hidden save for that gap through which from the
study window he watches the street. So hidden it is that
the light from the corner street lamp scarcely touches it.

From the window he can also see the sign, which he calls
his monument It is planted in the comer of the yard, low,
facing the street It is three feet long and eighteen inches
high — a neat oblong presenting its face to who passes and
its back to him. But he does not need to read it because
he made the sign with hammer and saw, neatly, and he
painted the legend which it bears, neatly too, tediously,
when he realised that he would have to begin to have to
have money for bread and fire and clothing. When he
quitted the seminary he had a small income inherited from
his father, which, as soon as he got his church, he forwarded
promptly on receipt of the quarterly checks to an institution
for delinquent girls in Memphis. Then he lost his church,

49



50

he lost the Church, and the bitterest thing which he be-
lieved that he had ever faced — more bitter even than the
bereavement and the shame — was the letter which he wrote
them to say that from now on he could send them but half
the sum which he had previously sent.

So he continued to send them half of a revenue which in
its entirety would little more than have kept him. “Luckily
there are things which I can do,” he said at the time. Hence
the sign, carpentered neatly by himself and by himself let-
tered, with bits of broken glass contrived cunningly into
the paint, so that at night, when the coiner stieet lamp
shone upon it, the letters glittered with an effect as of
Christmas:

Rev. Gail Hightower, D.D.

Art Lessons

Handpainted Xmas & Anniversary Cards
Photographs Developed

But that was years ago, and he had had no ait pupils and
few enough Christmas cards and photograph plates, and
the paint and the shattered glass had weathered out of the
fading letters. They were still readable, however; though,
like Hightower himself, few of the townspeople needed to
read them any more But now and then a Negio nursemaid
with her white charges would loiter there and spell them
aloud with that vacuous idiocy of her idle and illiterate
kind, or a stranger happening along the quiet and remote
and unpaved and httleused street would pause and read
the sign and then look up at the small, brown, almost con-
cealed house, and pass on; now and then the stranger
would mention the sign to some acquaintance m the town.
“Oh, yes,” the friend would say. “Hightower. He lives there
by himself. He come here as minister of the Presbyterian
church, but his wife went bad on him. She would slip off
to Memphis now and then and have a good time. About



51

twenty-five years ago, that was, right after he come here
Some folks claimed he knew about it. That he couldn’t os
wouldn’t satisfy her himself and that he knew what she wa*
doing. Then one Saturday night she got killed, in a house
or something in Memphis. Papers full of it. He had to resign
from the church, but he wouldn’t leave Jefferson, for some
reason. They tried to get him to, for his own sake as well as
the town’s, the church’s. That was pretty bad on the church*
you see. Having strangers come here and hear about it, and
him refusing lo leave the town. But he wouldn’t go away,
He has lived out there on what used to be the main street
ever since, by himself. At least it aint a principal street any
more. That’s something. But then he dont worry anybodj'
any more, and I reckon most folks have forgot about him.
Does his own housework. I dont reckon anybody’s even
been inside that house in twenty-five years. We dont know
why he stays here. But any day you pass along there about
dusk or nightfall, you can see him sitting in the window.
Just sitting there. The rest of the time folks wont hardly see
him around the place at all, except now and then working
in his garden.”

So the sign which he carpentered and lettered is even
less to him than it is to the town; he is no longer conscious
of it as a sign, a message. He does not remember it at all
until he takes his place in the study window just before
dusk. Then it is just a familiar low oblong shape without
any significance at all, low at the street end of the shallow
lawn; it too might have grown up out of the tragic and In-
escapable earth along with the low spreading maples and
the shrubs, without help or hindrance from him. He no
longer even looks at it. as he does not actually see the trees
beneath and through which he watches the street, waiting
for nightfall, the moment of night. The house, the study, is
dark behind him, and he is waiting for that instant when
all light ^has failed out of the sky and it would be night save



52

for that faint light which daygranaried leaf and grass blade
reluctant suspire, making still a little light on earth though
night itself has come Now , soon , he thinks, soon , now He
does not say even to himself: "There remains yet something
of honor and pride, of life."

When Byron Bunch first came to Jefferson seven years
ago and saw that little sign Gail Hightower D D. Art Les-
sons Christmas Cards Photographs Developed he thought,
TD.D What is D D / and he asked and they told him it
meant Done Damned Gail Hightower Done Damned in
Jefferson anyway, they told him. And how Hightower had
come straight to Jefferson from the seminary, refusing to
accept any other call, how he had pulled every string he
could in order to be sent to Jefferson. And how he arrived
with his young wife, descending from the train in a state of
excitement already, talking, telling the old men and women
who were the pillars of the church how he had set his mind
on Jefferson from the first, since he had first decided to be-
come a minister; telling them with a kind of glee of the let-
ters he had written and the worrying he had done and the
influence he had used m order to be called here. To the peo-
ple of the town it sounded like a horsetrader s glee over an
advantageous trade. Perhaps that is how it sounded to the
elders Because they listened to him with something cold
and astonished and dubious, since he sounded like it was
the town he desired to live in and not the church and the
people who composed the church, that he wanted to server
As if he did not care about the people, the living people,
about whether they wanted him here or not. And he being
young too, and the old men and the old women trying to
talk down his gleeful excitement with serious matters of the
church and its responsibilities and his own. And they told
Byron how the young minister was still excited even after
six months, still talkmg about the Civil War and his grand-



53

father, a cavalryman, who was killed, and about General
Grants stores burning in Jefferson until it did not make
sense at all They told Byron how he seemed to talk that
way in the pulpit too, wild too in the pulpit, using religion
as though it were a dream. Not a nightmare, but something
which went faster than the words m the Book; a sort of
cyclone that did not even need to touch the actual earth.
And the old men and women did not like that, either.

It was as if he couldn't get religion and that galloping
cavalry and his dead grandfather shot from the galloping
horse untangled from each other, even in the pulpit. And
that he could not untangle them in his private life, at home
either, perhaps. Perhaps he did not even try to at home,
Byron thought, thinking how that is the sort of thing that
men do to the women who belong to them, thinking that
that is why women have to be strong and should not be
held blameable for what they do with or for or because
of men, since God knew that being anybody's wife was a
tricky enough business. They told him how the wife was a
small, quietlooking girl who at first the town thought just
had nothing to say for herself. But the town said that if
Hightower had just been a more dependable kind of man,
the kind of man a minister should be instead of being bom
about thirty years after the only day he seemed to have ever
lived in — that day when his grandfather was shot from the
galloping horse — she would have been all right too. But he
was not, and the neighbors would hear her weeping in the
parsonage in the afternoons or late at night, and the neigh-
bors knowing that the husband would not know what to
do about it because he did not know what was wrong. And
how sometimes she would not even come to the churchy
where her own husband was preaching, even on Sunday,
and they would look at him and wonder if he even knew
that she was not there, if he had not even forgot that he
ever had a wife, up there in the pulpit with his hands flying



54

around him and the dogma he was supposed to preach all
full of galloping cavalry and defeat and gloiy just as when
he tried to tell them on the street about the galloping horses,
it in turn would get all mixed up with absolution and choirs
of martial seraphim, until it was natural that the old men
and women should believe that what he preached in Gods
own house on God's own day verged on actual sacrilege.

And they told Byron how after about a year in Jefferson,
the wife began to wear that frozen look on her face, and
when the church ladies would go to call Hightower would
meet them alone, in his shirt sleeves and without any collar,
in a flurry, and for a time it would seem as though he could
not even think what they had come for and what he ought
to do. Then he would invite them in and excuse himself
and go out. And they would not hear a sound anywhere in
the house, sitting there in their Sunday dresses, looking at
one another and about the room, listening and not hearing
a sound. And then he would come back with his coat and
collar on and sit and talk with them about the church and
the sick, and they talking back, bright and quiet, still listen-
ing and maybe watching fire door, maybe wondering if he
knew what they believed that they already knew.

The ladies quit going there. Soon they did not even see
the ministers wife on the street. And he still acting like
there was nothing wrong. And then she would be gone for
a day or two; they would see her get on the early train,
with her face beginning to get thin and gaunted as though
she never ate enough and that frozen look on it as if she
were not seeing what she wa s looking at. And he would
tell that she had gone to visit her people downstate some-
where, until one day, during one of her absences, a Jeffer-
son woman shopping in Memphis saw her walking fast into
a hotel there. It was one Saturday that the woman returned
home and told it But the next day Hightower was m the
pulpit, with religion and the galloping cavalry all mixed up



55

again, and the wife returned Monday and the following
Sunday she came to church again, for the first time in six
or seven months, sitting by herself at the rear of the church.
She came every Sunday after that for a while. Then she was
gone again, in the middle of the week this time (it was in
July and hot) and Hightower said that she had gone to see
her folks again, in the country where it would be cool; and
the old men, the elders, and the old women watching him,
not knowing if he believed what he was telling or not, and
the young people talking behind his back.

But they could not tell whether he himself believed or
not what he told them, if he cared or not, with his religion
and his grandfather being shot from the galloping horse
all mixed up, as though the seed which his grandfather had
transmitted to him had been on the horse too that night
and had been killed too and time had stopped there and
then for the seed and nothing had happened in time since,
not even him.

The wife returned before Sunday. It was hot; the old
people said that it was the hottest spell which the town had
ever known. She came to church that Sunday and took her
seat on a bench at the back, alone. In the middle of the
sermon she sprang from the bench and began to scream,
to shriek something toward the pulpit, shaking her hands
toward the pulpit where her husband had ceased talking,
leaning forward with his hands raised and stopped. Some
people nearby tried to hold her but she fought them, and
they told Byron how she stood there, in the aisle now,
shrieking and shaking her hands at the pulpit where her
husband leaned with his hand still raised and his wild face
frozen m the shape of the thundering and allegorical period
which he had not completed. They did not know whether
she was shaking her hands at him or at God. Then he cam#
down and approached and she stopped fighting then and
he led her out, with the heads turning as they passed, until



56

the superintendent told the organist to play. That afternoon
the elders held a meeting behind locked doors. The people
did not know what went on behind them, save that High-
tower returned and entered the vestry room and closed the
door behind him too.

But the people did not know what had happened. They
only knew that die church made up a sum to send the wife
to an institution, a sanatorium, and that Hightower took
her there and came back and preached the next Sunday,
as usual. The women, the neighbors, some of whom had
not entered the parsonage in months, were kind to him,
taking him dishes now and then, telling one another and
their husbands what a mess the parsonage was in, and how
the minister seemed to eat like an animal — just when he got
hungry and just whatever he could find. Every two weeks
he would go and visit his wife in the sanatorium, but he
always returned after a day or so; and on Sunday, in the
pulpit again, it was as though the whole thing had never
happened. The people would ask about her health, curious
and kind, and he would thank them. Then Sunday he
would be again in the pulpit, with his wild hands and his
wild rapt eager voice in which like phantoms God and sal-
vation and the galloping horses and his dead grandfather
thundered, while below him the elders sat, and the congre-
gation, puzzled and outraged. In the fall the wife came
home She looked better. She had put on a little flesh. She
had changed more than that, even. Perhaps it was that she
seemed chastened now; awake, anyway. Anyhow she was
now like the ladies had wanted her to be all the time, as
they believed that the ministers wife should be. She at-
tended church and prayer meeting regularly, and the ladies
called upon her and she called upon them, sitting quiet and
humble, even in her own house, while they told her how to
run it and what to wear and what to make her husband eat

It might even be said that they forgave her. No crime or



57

transgression had been actually named and no penance had
been actually set. But the town did not believe that the
ladies had forgot those previous mysterious trips, with
Memphis as their destination and for that purpose regard-
ing which all had the same conviction, though none ever
put it into words, spoke it aloud, since the town believed
that good women dont forget things easily, good or bad,
lest the taste and savor of forgiveness die from the palate
of conscience. Because the town believed that the ladies
knew the truth, since it believed that bad women can be
fooled by badness, since they have to spend some of their
time not being suspicious. But that no good woman can be
fooled by it because, by being good herself, she does not
need to worry any more about hers or anybody els es good-
ness; hence she has plenty of time to smell out sin. That was
why, they believed, that good can fool her almost any time
into believing that it is evil, but that evil itself can never
fool her. So when after four or five months the wife went
away again on a visit and the husband said again that she
had gone to visit her people, the town believed that this
time even he was not fooled. Anyway, she came back and
he went on preaching every Sunday like nothing had hap-
pened, making his calls on the people and the sick and
talking about the church. But the wife did not come to
church any more, and soon the ladies stopped calling on her,
going to the parsonage at all. And even the neighbors on
either side would no longer see her about the house. And
soon it was as though she were not there; as though every-
one had agreed that she was not there, that the minister
did not even have a wife. And he preaching to them every
Sunday, not even telling them now that she had gone to
visit her people. Maybe he was glad of that, the town
thought. Maybe he was glad to not have to lie any more.

So nobody saw her when she got on the train that Fri-
day, or maybe it was Saturday, the day itself. It was Sum



58

day morning's paper which they saw, telling how she had
jumped or fallen from a hotel window in Memphis Saturday
night, and was dead. There had been a man m the room
with her. He was arrested He was drunk They were regis-
tered as man and wife, under a fictitious name. The police
found her rightful name wheie she had written it herself
on a piece of paper and then torn it up and thrown it into
the waste basket The papers printed it, with the story:
wife of the Reverend Gail Hightower, of Jeffeison, Missis-
sippi. And the story told how the paper telephoned to the
husband at two am. and how the husband said that he
had nothing to say. And when they reached the church
that Sunday morning the yard was full of Memphis report-
ers taking pictures of the church and the parsonage Then
Hightower came. The repoiters tried to stop him but he
walked right through them and into the church and up into
the pulpit The old ladies and some of the old men were
already in the church, horrified and outraged, not so much
about the Memphis business as about the presence of the
reporters. But when Hightower came in and actually went
ap into the pulpit, they forgot about the reporteis even.
The ladies got up first and began to leave Then the men
got up too, and then the chuich was empty save for the
minister in the pulpit, leaning a little forward, with the
Book open and has hands propped on either side of it and
his head not bowed either, and the Memphis reporters
(they had followed him into the church) sitting m a line in
the rear pew. They said he was not watching his congrega-
tion leaving; he was not looking at anything.

They told Byron about it, about how at last the minister
closed the Book, carefully, and came down into the empty
church and walked up the aisle without once looking at the
row of reporters, like the congregation had done, and went
out the door. There were some photographers waiting out
in front, with the cameras all set up and their heads under



59

the black cloths. The minister had evidently expected this.
Because he emerged from the church with an open hymn
book held before his face. But the cameramen had evi-
dently expected that too. Because they fooled him. Very
likely he was not used to it and so was easily fooled, they
told Byron. One of the cameramen had his machine set up
to one side, and the minister did not see that one at all, or
until too late. He was keeping his face concealed from the
one in front, and next day when the picture came out in
the paper it had been taken from the side, with the minister
in the middle of a step, holding the hymn book before his
face. And behind the book his lips were drawn back as
though he were smiling. But his teeth were tight together
and his face looked like the face of Satan in the old prints.
The next day he brought his wife home and buried her.
The town came to the ceremony. It was not a funeral. He
did not take the body to the church at all. He took it
straight to the cemetery and he was preparing to read from
the Book himself when another minister came forward and
took it from his hand. A lot of the people, the younger ones v
remained after he and the others had gone, looking at the
grave.

Then even the members of the other churches knew that
his own had asked him to resign, and that he refused. The
next Sunday a lot of them from the other churches came to
his church to see what would happen. He came and entered
the church. The congregation as one rose and walked out,
leaving the minister and those from the other churches who
had come as though to a show. So he preached to them, as
he had always preached: with that rapt fury which they
had considered sacrilege and which those from the other
churches believed to be out and out insanity.

He would not resign. The elders asked the church hoard
to recall him. But after the story, the pictures in the papers
and all, no other town would have him either. There was



60

nothing against him personally, they all insisted. He was
just unlucky. He was just bom unlucky. So the people quit
coming to the church at all, even the ones from the other
churches who had come out of curiosity for a time he was
no longer even a show now, he was now only an outrage.
But he would reach the church at the old hour each Sun-
day morning and go to tire pulpit, and the congregation
would rise and leave, and the loafers and such would gather
along the street outside and listen to him preaching and
praying in the empty chuich And the Sunday after that
when he arrived the door was locked, and the loafers
watched him try the door and then desist and stand there
with his face still not bowed, with the street lined with men
Who never went to church anyway, and little boys who did
not know exactly what it was but that it was something,
stopping and looking with still round eyes at the man
standing quite motionless before the locked door The next
day the town heard how he had gone to the elders and re-
signed his pulpit for the good of the church*

Then the town was sorry with being glad, as people some-
times are sorry for those whom they have at last forced to
do as they wanted them to They thought of course that he
would go away now, and the church made up a collection
for him to go away on and settle somewhere else. Then he
refused to leave the town. They told Byron of the conster-
nation, the more than outrage, when they learned that he
had bought the little house on the back street where he
now lives and has lived ever since, and the elders held an-
other meeting because they said that they had given him
the money to go away on, and when he spent it for some-
thing else he had accepted the money under false pretences.
They went to him and told him so He asked them to ex-
cuse him, he returned to the room with the sum which had
been given him, to the exact penny and in the exact denom-
inations, and insisted that they take it back. But they re-



61

fused, and he would not tell where he had got the money
to buy the house with. So by the next day, they told Byron,
there were some who said that he had insured his wife’s life
and then paid someone to murder her. But everyone knew
that this was not so, including the ones who told and re^
peated it and the ones who listened when it was told
But he would not leave the town. Then one day they saw
the little sign which he had made and painted himself and
set in his front yard, and they knew that he meant to stay.
He still kept the cook, a Negro woman. He had had her all
the time. But they told Byron how as soon as his wife was
dead, the people seemed to realise all at once that the Negro
was a woman, that he had that Negro woman in the house
alone with him all day. And how the wife was hardly cold
in the shameful grave before the whispering began About
how he had made his wife go bad and commit suicide be-
cause he was not a natural husband, a natural man, and
that the Negro woman was the reason And that’s all it took,
all that was lacking. Byron listened quietly, thinking to him-
self how people everywhere are about die same, but that
it did seem that in a small town, where evil is harder to ac-
complish, where opportunities for privacy are scarcer, that
people can invent more of it in other people’s names. Be-
cause that was all it required: that idea, that single idle
word blown from mind to mind. One day the cook quit
They heard how one night a party of carelessly masked
men went to the minister’s house and ordered him to fire
her. Then they heard how the next day the woman told that
she quit herself because her employer asked her to do some-
thing which she said was against God and nature. And it
was said that some masked men had scared her into quit-
ting because she was what is known as a high brown and
it was known that there were two or three men in the town
who would object to her doing whatever it was which she
considered contrary to God and nature, since, as some of



62

the younger men said, if a nigger woman considered it
against God and nature, it must be pretty bad. Anyway,
the minister couldn't — or didn't — get another woman cook
Possibly the men scared all the other Negro women in town
that same night So he did his own cooking for a while, un-
til they heard one day that he had a Negro man to cook for
him. And that finished him, sure enough. Because that eve-
ning some men, not masked either, took the Negio man out
and whipped him. And when Hightower waked the next
morning his study window was broken and on the floor lay
a brick with a note tied to it, commanding him to get out
of town by sunset and signed K.K K. And he did not go,
and on the second morning a man found him m the woods
about a mile from town. He had been tied to a tree and
beaten unconscious.

He refused to tell who had done it. The town knew that
that was wrong, and some of the men came to him and
tried again to persuade him to leave Jefferson, for his own
good, telling him that next time they might kill him But
he refused to leave. He would not even talk about the beat-
ing, even when they offered to prosecute the men who had
done it. But he would do neither. He would neither tell,
nor depart. Then all of a sudden the whole thing seemed
to blow away, like an evil wind. It was as though the town
realised at last that he would be a part of its life until he
died, and that they might as well become reconciled. As
though, Byron thought, the entire affair had been a lot of
people performing a play and that now and at last they
had all played out the parts which had been allotted them
and now they could live quietly with one another. They
let the minister alone. They would see him working in the
yard or the garden, and on the street and in the stores with
a small basket on his arm, and they would speak to him.
They knew that he did his own cooking and housework,
and after a while the neighbors began to send him dishes



63

again, though they were the sort of dishes which they
would have sent to a poor mill famfly. But it was food, and
wellmeant Because, as Byron thought, people forget a lot
in twenty years. ‘Why/ he thinks, 1 dont reckon there is
anybody in Jefferson that knows that he sits in that win-
dow from sundown to full dark every day that comes, ex-
cept me. Or what the inside of that house looks like. And
they dont even know that I know, or likely they'd take us
both out and whip us again, since folks dont seem to forget
much longer than they remember.' Because there is one
other thing, which came into Byron's own knowledge and
observation, in his own time since he came to Jefferson to
live.

Hightower read a great deal. That is, Byron had exam
hied with a kind of musing and respectful consternation
the books which lined the study wails: books of religion
and history and science of whose very existence Byron had
never heard. One day about four years ago a Negro man
came running up to the minister's house from his cabin on
the edge of town immediately behind it, and said that his 1
wife was at childbed. Hightower had no telephone and
he told the Negro to run next door and call a doctor. He
watched the Negro go to the gate of the next house. But
instead of entering, the Negro stood there for a time and
then went on up the street toward town, walking; High-
tower knew that the man would walk all the way to town
and then spend probably thirty minutes more getting in
touch with a doctor, in his fumbling and timeless Negro
fashion, instead of askmg some white woman to telephone
for him. Then he went to his kitchen door and he could
hear the woman in the not so distant cabin, wailmg. He
waited no longer. He ran down to the cabin and found
that the woman had got out of bed, for what reason he
never learned, and she was now on her hands and knees
on the floor, trying to get back into the bed, screaming and



64

wailing. He got her back into the bed and told her to lie
still, frightened her into obeying him, and ran back to his
house and took one of the books fiom the study shelf and
got his razor and some cord and ran back to the cabin
and delivered the child But it was already dead, the doctor
when arrived said that she had doubtless injured it when
she left die bed where Hightower found her. He also ap-
proved of Hightower s work, and the husband was satisfied
too.

"But it was just too close to that other business/ Byron
thought, 'even despite the fifteen years between them/ Be-
cause within two days there were those who said that the
child was Hightower s and that he had let it die deliber-
ately. But Byron believed that even the ones who said this
did not believe it. He believed that the town had had the
habit of saying things about the disgraced minister which
they did not believe themselves for too long a time to break
themselves of it. 'Because always/ he thinks, 'when any-
thing gets to be a habit, it also manages to get a right good
distance away from truth and fact/ And he remembers one
evening when he and Hightower were talking together end
Hightower said: "They are good people. They must believe
what they must believe, especially as it was I who was at
one time both master and servant of their believing. And
so it is not for me to outrage their believing nor for Byron
Bunch to say that they are wrong. Because all that any
man can hope for is to be permitted to live quietly among
his fellows.” That was soon after Byron had heard the stoiy,
shortly after the evening visits to Hightowers study began
and Byron still wondered why the other remained m Jeffer-
son, almost within sight of, and within hearing of, the
church which had disowned and expelled him. One eve-
ning Byron asked him.

"Why do you spend your Saturday afternoons working



65

at the mill while other men axe talcing pleasure down
town?” Hightower said.

*1 dont know ,” Byron said. “I reckon that’s just my life.”

“And I reckon this is just my life, too,” the other said.
‘But I know now why it is/ Byron thinks. It is because a
fellow is more afraid of the trouble he might have than he
ever is of the trouble he’s already got. He’ll cling to trouble
he’s used to before hell risk a change Yes. A man will talk
about how he’d like to escape from living folks. But it’s the
dead folks that do him the damage. It’s the dead ones that
lay quiet in one place and dont try to hold him, that he
cant escape from.’

They have thundered past now and crashed silently on
into the dusk, night has fully come. Yet he still sits at the
study window, the room still dark behind him. The street
lamp at the comer flickers and glares, so that the bitten
shadows of the unwinded maples seem to toss faintly upon
the August darkness. From a distance, quite faint though
quite clear, he can hear the sonorous waves of massed
voices from the church: a sound at once austere and rich,
abject and proud, swelling and falling in the quiet summer
darkness like a harmonic tide.

Then he sees a man approaching along the street. On a
week night he would have recognised the figure, the shape,
the carriage and gait. But on Sunday evening, and with
the echo of the phantom hooves still crashing soundlessly
in the duskfilled study, he watches quietly the puny, un-
horsed figure moving with that precarious and meretricious
cleverness of animals balanced on their hinder legs; that
cleverness of which the man animal is so fatuously proud
and which constantly betrays him by means of natural laws
like gravity and ice, and by the very extraneous objects
which he has himself invented, like motor cars and furni-
ture in the dark, and the very refuse of his own eating left



66

upon floor or pavement; and he thinks quietly how right
die ancients were in making the horse an attribute and
symbol of warriors and kings, when he sees the man in
the street pass the low sign and turn into his gate and ap-
proach the house. He sits forward then, watching the man
come up the dark walk toward the dark door; he hears
the man stumble heavily at the dark bottom step. “Byron
Bunch,” he says. “In town on Sunday night Byron Bunch
In town on Sunday/"



4


THEY SIT FACING ONE ANOTHER ACROSS THE DESK. THE STUDY

is lighted now, by a greenshaded reading lamp sitting upon
the desk. Hightower sits behind it, in an ancient swivel
chair, Byron in a straight chair opposite. Both their faces
are just without the direct downward pool of light from
the shaded lamp. Through the open window the sound of
singing from the distant church comes. Byron talks in a
flat, level voice.

"It was a strange thing. I thought that if there ever was a
place where a man would be where the chance to do harm
could not have found him, it would have been out there at
the mill on a Saturday evening. And with the house burn-
ing too, right in my face, you might say. It was like all the
time I was eating dinner and I would look up now and then
and see that smoke and I would think, "Well, I wont see a
soul out here this evening, anyway. I aint going to be in-
terrupted this evening, at least/ And then I looked up and
there she was, with her face all fixed for smiling and with
her mouth all fixed to say his name, when she saw that I
wasn’t him. And I never knowed any better than to blab
the whole thing.” He grimaces faintly. It is not a smile. His
upper lip just lifts momentarily, the movement, even the

67



08

surface wrinkling, travelling no further and vanishing al-
most at once. “I never even suspicioned then that what I
didn’t know was not the worst of it.”

“It must have been a strange thing that could keep Byron
Bunch in Jefferson over Sunday/’ Hightower says. “But she
was looking for him. And you helped her to find him.
Wasn’t what you did what she wanted, what she had come
all the way from Alabama to find' 5 ”

“I reckon I told her, all right. I reckon it aint any ques-
tion about that With her watching me, sitting there, swole-
belhed, watching me with them eyes that a man could not
have lied to if he had wanted. And me blabbing on, with
that smoke right yonder in plain sight like it was put there
to warn me, to make me watch my mouth only I never had
the sense to see it.”

“Oh,” Hightower says. “The house that burned yesterday.
But I dont see any connection between — Whose house was
it? I saw the smoke, myself, and I asked a passing Negro,
but he didn’t know.”

“That old Burden house,” Byron says. He looks at the
other. They look at one another. Hightower is a tall man,
and he was thin once. But he is not thin now. His skin is
the color of flour sacking and his upper body in shape is
like a loosely filled sack falling from his gaunt shoulders of
its own weight, upon his lap. Then Byron says, ""You aint
heard yet.” The other watches him. He says in a musing
tone: “That would be for me to do too. To tell on two days
to two folks something they aint going to want to hear and
that they hadr/t ought to have to hear at all.”

""What is this that you think I will not want to hear?
What is it that I have not heard?”

“Not the fire,” Byron says. “They got out of the fire all
right”

""They? I understood that Miss Burden lived there alone.”

Again Byron looks at the ;>ther for a moment. But High-



69

towers face is merely grave and interested. “Brown and
Christmas,” Byron says. Still Hightowers face does not
change in expression. “You aint heard that, even,” Byron
says. “They lived out there.”

“Lived out there? They boarded in the house?”

“No. In a old nigger cabm in the back. Christmas fixed
it up three years ago. He's been living in it ever since, with
folks wondering where he slept at night. Then when him
and Brown set up together, he took Brown in with him.”

“Oh,” Hightower said. “But I dont see ... If they were
comfortable, and Miss Burden didn't — ”

“I reckon they got along. They were selling whiskey, us-
ing that old place for a headquarters, a blind. I dont reckon
she knew that, about the whiskey. Leastways, folks dont
know if she ever knew or not. They say that Christmas
started it by himself three years ago, just selling to a few
regular customers that didn't even know one another. But
when he took Brown in with him, I reckon Brown wanted
to spread out. Selling it by the half a pint out of his shirt
bosom in any alley and to anybody. Selling what he never
drunk, that is. And I reckon the way they got the whiskey
they sold would not have stood much looking into. Because
about two weeks after Brown quit out at the mill and taken
to riding around in that new car for his steady work, he
was down town drunk one Saturday night and bragging
to a crowd in the barbershop something about him and
Christmas in Memphis one night, or on a road close to
Memphis. Something about them and that new car hid in
the bushes and Christmas with a pistol, and a lot more
about a truck and a hundred gallons of something, until
Christmas come in quick and walked up to him and jerked
him out of the chair. And Christmas saying m that quiet
voice of his, that aint pleasant and aint mad either: Tou
ought to be careful about drinking so much of this Jeffer-
son hair tonic. It's gone to your head First thing you know



70

you 11 have a harelip/ Holding Brown up he was with one
hand and slapping his face with the other. They didn’t look
like hard licks. But the folks could see the red even through
Brown’s whiskers when Christmas’ hand would come away
between licks. "You come out and get some fresh air/ Christ-
mas says. ‘You re keeping these folks from working/” He
muses. He speaks again: "And there she was, sitting there
on them staves, watching me and me blabbing the whole
thing to her, and her watching me. And then she says, ‘Did
he have a little white scar right here by his mouth?’ ”

* And Brown is the man,” Hightower says. He sits mo-
tionless, watching Byron with a sort of quiet astonishment.
There is nothing militant in it, nothing of outraged moral-
ity. It is as though he were listening to the doings of people
of a different race. "Her husband a bootlegger. Well, well,
well/’ Yet Byron can see in the other s face something latent,
about to wake, of which Hightower himself is unaware, as
if something inside the man were trying to warn or prepare
Mm. But Byron thinks that this is just the reflection of
what he himself already knows and is about to tell
"And so I had already told her before I knew it And I
could have bit my tongue in two, even then, even when I
thought that that was all.” He is not looking at the other
now. Through the window, faint yet clear, the blended or-
gan and voices come from the distant church, across the
stall evening. I wonder if he hears it too Byron thinks Or
maybe he has listened to it so much and so long that he
dont even hear it any more . Dont even need to not listen
"And she set there all the evening while I worked, and the
smoke dying away at last, and me trying to think what to
tell her and what to do. She wanted to go right on out
there, for me to tell her the way. When I told her it was
two miles she just kind of smiled, like I was a child or some-
thing. 1 done come all the way from Alabama/ she said. 1
reckon I aint going to worry about two miles more/ And



71

then I told her . . His voice ceases. He appears to con-
template the floor at his feet. He looks up. T lied, 1 reckon.
Only in a way it was not a lie. It was because I knowed
there would be folks out there watching the fire, and her
coming up, trying to find him. I didn’t know myself, then,
the other. The rest of it The worst of it. So I told her that
he was busy at a job he had, and that the best time to find
him would be down town after six o’clock. And that was
the truth. Because I reckon he does call it work, carrying
all them cold little bottles nekkid against his chest, and if
he ever was away from the square it was just because h6
was a little behind in getting back or had just stepped into
a alley for a minute. So I persuaded her to wait and she set
there and I went on working, trying to decide what to do.
When I think now how worried I was on what little I
knowed, now when I know the rest of it, it dont seem like
I had anything then to worry me at all. All day I have been
thinking how easy it would be if I could just turn back to
yesterday and not have any more to worry me than I had
then”

"I still cannot see what you have to worry about,” High-
tower says. “It is not your fault that the man is what he is
or she what she is. You did what you could. Ail that any
stranger could be expected to do. Unless . . ” His voice
ceases also. Then it dies away on that inflection, as if idle
thinking had become speculation and then something like
concern. Opposite him Byron sits without moving, his face
lowered and grave. And opposite Byron, Hightower does
not yet think love . He remembers only that Byron is still
young and has led a life of celibacy and hard labor, and
that by Byron’s telling the woman whom he has never
seen possesses some disturbing quality at least, even though
Byron still believes that it is only pity. So he watches Byron
now with a certain narrowness neither cold nor warm*
while Byron continues in that flat voice: about how at six



72

o'clock he had still decided on nothing; that when he and
Lena reached the square he was still undecided. And now
there begins to come into Hightower s puzzled expression
a quality of shrinking and foreboding as Byron talks qui-
etly, telling about how he decided after they reached the
square to take Lena on to Mrs Beards, And Byron talking
quietly, thinking, remembering: It was like something gone
through the air, the evening, making the familiar faces of
men appear strange, and he, who had not yet heard, with-
out having to know that something had happened which
made of the former dilemma of his innocence a matter for
children, so that he knew before he knew what had hap-
pened, that Lena must not hear about it. He did not even
have to be told in words that he had surely found the lost
Lucas Burch; it seemed to him now that only the crassest
fatuousness and imbecility should have kept him unaware.
It seemed to him that fate, circumstance, had set a warning
in the sky all day long in that pillar of yellow smoke, and
he too stupid to read it. And so he would not let them tell
‘—the men whom they passed, the air that blew upon them
full of it — lest she hear too. Perhaps he knew at the time
that she would have to know, hear, it sooner or later; that
in a way it was her right to know. It just seemed to him
that if he could only get her across the square and into a
house his responsibility would be dischaiged. Not respon-
sibility for the evil to which he held himself for no other
reason than that of having spent the afternoon with her
while it was happening, having been chosen by circum-
stance to represent Jefferson to her who had come afoot
and without money for thirty days in order to reach there.
He did not hope nor intend to avoid that responsibility. It
was just to give himself and her time to be shocked and
surprised. He tells it quietly, fumbling, his face lowered,
in his flat, inflectionless voice, while across the desk High-



73

tower watches him with that expression of shrinking and
denial

They reached the boarding house at last and entered it.
It was as though she felt foreboding too, watchmg him as
they stood in the hall, speaking for the first time: “What
is it them men were trying to tell you? What is it about that
burned house?”

“It wasn’t anything,” he said, his voice sounding dry and
light to him. “Just something about Miss Burden got hurt
in the fire.”

“How got hurt f 5 How bad hurt?”

“I reckon not bad. Maybe not hurt at all. Just folks talk-
ing, like as not. Like they will” He could not look at her,
meet her eyes at all. But he could feel her watching him,
and he seemed to hear a myriad sounds: voices, the hushed
tense voices about the town, about the square through
which he had hurried her, where men met among the safe
and familiar lights, telling it. The house too seemed filled
with familiar sounds, but mostly with inertia, a terrible pro*
crastmation as he gazed down the dim hall, thinking Why
dont she come on. Why dont she come on Then Mrs Beard
did come, a comfortable woman, with red arms and untidy
grayish hair. “This here is Miz Burch,” he said. His expres-
sion was almost a glaie: importunate, urgent “She just got
to town from Alabama. She is looking to meet her husband
here. He amt come yet So I brought her here, where she
can rest some before she gets mixed up m the excitement
of town. She aint been in town or talked to anybody yet,
and so I thought maybe you could fix her up a place to
get rested some before she has to hear talking and . .
His voice ceased, died, recapitulant, urgent, importunate.
Then he believed that she had got his meaning. Later he
knew that it was not because of his asking that she re-
frained from telling what he knew that she had also heard,



74

but because Jhe had already noticed the pregnancy and
that she would have kept the matter hidden anyway. She
looked at Lena, once, completely, as strange women had
been doing for four weeks now.

"How long does she aim to stay?” Mrs Beard said.

"Just a night or two ” Byron said. "Maybe just tonight*
She’s looking to meet her husband here. She just got in,
and she aint had time to ask or inquire — ■” His voice was
still recapitulant, meaningful. Mrs Beard watched him now.
He thought that she was still trying to get his meaning.
But what she was doing was watching him grope, be-
lieving (or about to believe) that his fumbling had a dif-
ferent reason and meaning. Then she looked at Lena again.
Her eyes were not exactly cold. But they were not warm.

"I reckon she aint got any business trying to go anywhere
right now,” she said.

"That’s what I thought,” Byron said, quickly, eagerly.
"With all the talk and excitement she might have to listen
to, after not hearing no talk and excitement ... If you are
crowded tonight, I thought she might have my room.”

"Yes,” Mrs Beard said immediately. "You’ll be taking out
in a few minutes, anyway. You want her to have your xoom
until you get back Monday morning?”

"I aint going tonight,” Byron said. He did not look away.
"I wont be able to go this time.” He looked straight into
cold, already disbelieving eyes, watching her in turn trying
to read his own, believing that she read what was there
instead of what she believed was there. They say that it is
the practiced liar who can deceive. But so often the prac-
ticed and chronic liar deceives only himself; it i$ the man
who all his life has been selfconvicted of veracity whose
lies find quickest credence

"Oh,” Mrs Beard said. She looked at Lena again. "Aint
she got any acquaintances in Jefferson?”

"She dont know nobody here,” Byron said. "Not this side



75


of Alabama. Likely Mr Burch will show up in the morning.'*

"Oh/' Mrs Beard said. "Where are you going to sleep?"
But she did not wait for an answer. "I reckon I can fix her
up a cot in my room for tonight. If she wont object to that"

"That'll be fine/' Byron said. "It'll be fine."

When the supper bell rang, he was all prepared. He had
found a chance to speak to Mrs Beard. He had spent more
time in inventing that lie than any yet. And then it was not
necessary; that which he was trying to shield was its own
protection. "Them men will be talking about it at the table,"
Mrs Beard said. "I reckon a woman in her shape ( and hav-
ing to find a husband named Burch at the same time she
thought with dry irony) aint got no business listening to
any more of man's devilment You bring her in later, after
they have all et." Which Byron did. Lena ate heartily again,
with that grave and hearty decorum, almost going to sleep
in her plate before she had finished.

"It's right tiring, travelling is," she explained.

"You go set in the parlor and I'll fix your cot/' Mrs Beard
said.

"I'd like to help," Lena said. But even Byron could see
that she would not; that she was dead for sleep.

"You go set in the parlor," Mrs Beard said. "I reckon Mr
Bunch wont mind keeping you company for a minute or
two."

"I didn't dare leave her alone," Byron says. Beyond the
desk Hightower has not moved. "And there we was setting,
at the very time when it was all coming out down town at
the sheriff's office, at the very time when Brown was telling
it all; about him and Christmas and the whiskey and all.
Only the whiskey wasn't much news to folks, not since he
had took Brown for a partner I reckon the only thing
folks wondered about was why Christmas ever took up with
Brown. Maybe it was because like not only finds like; it
cant even escape from being found by its like. Even when



76

it's just like in one thing, because even them two with the
same like was different. Christmas dared the law to make
money, and Brown dared the law because he never even
had sense enough to know he was doing it. Like that night
in the barbershop and him drunk and talking loud until
Christmas kind o£ run in and diagged him out And Mr
Maxey said, "What do you reckon that was he pretty near
told on himself and that other one?’ and Captain McLen-
don said, I doni reckon about it at all/ and Mr Maxey said,
‘Do you reckon they was actually holding up somebody
else’s liquor truck?’ and McLendon said, ‘Would it surprise
you to hear that that fellow Christmas hadn’t done no worse
than that m his life?”

“That’s what Brown was telling last night But everybody
knew about that They had been saying for a good while
that somebody ought to tell Miss Burden. But I reckon
there wasn't anybody that wanted to go out there and tell
her, because nobody knowed what was going to happen
then. I reckon there are folks born here that never even
saw her. I dont reckon I'd wanted to go out there to that
old house where nobody ever saw her unless maybe it was
folks in a passing wagon that would see her now and then
standing in the yard in a dress and sunbonnet that some
nigger women I know wouldn't have wore for its shape and
how it made her look. Or maybe she already knew it Being
a Yankee and all, maybe she didn't mind. And then couldn't
nobody have known what was going to happen.

“And so I didn’t dare leave her alone until she was in bed.
t aimed to come out and see you last night, right away. But
I never dared to lea\ e her. Them other boarders was pass-
ing up and down the hall and I didn’t know when one of
them would take a notion to come in and start talking
about it and tell the whole thing; I could already hear them
talking about it on the porch, and her still watching me
with her face all fixed to ask me again about that fire. And



77


so I didn’t dare leave her And we was setting there in thf
parlor and she couldn’t hardly keep her eyes open then,
and me telling her how I would find him for her all right,
only I wanted to come and talk to a preacher I knowed that
could help her to get in touch with him. And her setting
there with her eyes closed while I was telling her, not know-
ing that I knew that her and that fellow wasn’t married yet
She thought she had fooled eveiybody. And she asked me
what kind of a man it was that I aimed to tell about her to
and I told her and her setting there with her eyes closed so
that at last I said, "You aint heard a word I been saying
and she kind of roused up, but without opening her eyes*
and said, "Can he still marry folks?’ and I said, "What? Can
he what?’ and she said, "Is he still enough of a preacher to
marry folks ^ ”

Hightower has not moved. He sits erect behind the desk,
his forearms parallel upon the armrests of the chair. He
wears neither collar nor coat. His face is at once gaunt and
flabby; it is as though there were two faces, one imposed
upon the other, looking out from beneath the pale, bald
skull surrounded by a fringe of gray hair, from behind the
twin motionless glares of his spectacles. That part of his
torso visible above the desk is shapeless, almost monstrous,
with a soit and sedentary obesity. He s?ts rigid; on his face
now that expression of denial and flight has become defi-
nite. ""Byron,” he says; ""Byron. What is this you are telling
me?”

Byron ceases. He looks quietly at the other, with an ex-
pression of commiseration and pity. ""I knowed you liad not
heard yet. I knowed it would be for me to tell you.

They look at one another. ""What is it I haven’t heard
yet?”

""About Christmas. About yesterday and Christmas.
Christmas is part nigger. About him and Brown and yes-
terday.”



78

"Part Negro/" Hightower says. His voice sounds light, triv-
ial, like a thistle bloom falling into silence without a sound,
without any weight. He does not move. For a moment
longer he does not move. Then there seems to come over
his whole body, as if its parts were mobile like face fea-
tures, that shrinking and denial, and Byron sees that the
still, flaccid, big face is suddenly slick with sweat. But his
voice is light and calm. "What about Christmas and Brown
and yesterday?” he says

The sound of music from the distant church has long
since ceased. Now there is no sound in the room save the
steady shrilling of insects and the monotonous sound of
Byron s voice. Beyond the desk Hightower sits erect. Be-
tween his parallel and downturned palms and with his
lower body concealed by the desk, his attitude is that of an
eastern idol.

"It was yesterday morning. There was a countryman
coming to town in a wagon with his family. He was the
me that found the fire. No: he was the second one to get
there, because he told how there was already one fellow
there when he broke down the door. He told about how he
come into sight of the house and he said to his wife how it
was a right smart of smoke coming out of that kitchen, and
about how the wagon come on and then his wife said, "That
house is afire/ And I reckon maybe he stopped the wagon
and they set there in the wagon for a while, looking at the
smoke, and I reckon that after a while he said, Tt looks like
it is/ And I reckon it was his wife that made him get down
and go and see. "They dont know it ? s afire/ she said, I
reckon. "You go up there and tell them/ And he got out of
the wagon and went up onto the porch and stood there,
hollering "Hello. Hello" for a while. He told how he could
hear the fire then, inside the house, and then he hit the door
a lick with his shoulder and went m and then he found the



79

one that had found that fire first- It was Brown. But the
countryman didn’t know that He just said it was a drunk
man in the hall that looked like he had just finished falling
down the stairs, and the countryman said, "Your house is
afire, mister/ before he realised how drunk the man was.
And he told how the drunk man kept on saying how there
wasn’t nobody upstairs and that the upstairs was all afire
anyway and there wasn’t any use trying to save anything
from up there.

"But the countryman knew there couldn’t be that much
fire upstairs because the fire was all back toward the
kitchen. And besides, the man was too drunk to know, any-
way. And he told how he suspected there was something
wrong from the way the drunk man was trying to keep
him from going upstairs. So he started upstairs, and the
drunk fellow trying to hold him back, and he shoved the
drunk man away and went on up the stairs. He told how
the drunk man tried to follow him, still telling him how it
wasn’t anything upstairs, and he said that when he come
back down again and thought about the drunk fellow, he
was gone. But I reckon it was some time before he remem-
bered to think about Brown again. Because he went on up
the stairs and begun hollering again, opening the doors,
and then he opened the right door and he found her.”

He ceases. Then there is no sound in the room save the
insects. Beyond the open window the steady insects pulse
and beat, drowsy and myriad. "Found her,” Hightower says.
"It was Miss Burden he found.” He does not move. Byron
does not look at him, he might be contemplating his hands
upon his lap while he talks.

"She was lying on the floor. Her head had been cut pretty
near off, a lady with the beginning of gray hair. The man
said how he stood there and he could hear the fire and
there was smoke in the room itself now, like it had done
followed him m And how he was afraid to try to pick her



80

up and carry her out because her head might come dean
off. And then he said how he run back down the stairs
again and out the front without even noticing that the
drunk fellow was gone, and down to the road and told his
wife to whip the team on to the nearest telephone and call
for tlie sheriff loo. And how he run back around the hous<=
to the cistern and he said he was already drawing up a
bucket of water before he realised how foolish that was,
with the whole back end of the house afire good now. So
he ran back into the house and up the stairs again and into
the room and jerked a cover off the bed and rolled her onto
it and caught up the comers and swung it onto his back
like a sack of meal and earned it out of the house and laid
it down under a tree. And he said that what he was scared
of happened. Because the cover fell open and she was lay-
ing on her side, facing one way, and her head was turned
clean around like she was looking behind her. And he said
how if she could just have done that when she was alive,
she might not have been doing it now”

Byron ceases and looks, glances once, at the man beyond
die desk. Hightower has not moved. His face about the
twin blank glares of the spectacles is sweating quietly and
steadily. “And the sheriff come out, and the fire department
come too. But there wasn't nothing it could do because
there wasn't any water for the hose. And that old house
burned all evening and I could see the smoke from the mill
and I showed it to her when she come up, because I didn't
know then. And they brought Miss Burden to town, and
there was a paper at the bank that she had told them would
tell what to do with her when she died. It said how she had
a nephew in the North where she come from, her folks come
from. And they telegraphed the nephew and in two hours
they got the answer that the nephew would pay a thousand
dollars' reward for who done it.

“And Christmas and Brown were both gone. The sheriff



81

found out how somebody had been living in that cabin,
and then right off everybody begun to tell about Christmas
and Brown, that had kept it a secret long enough for one
of them or maybe both of them to murder that lady. But
nobody could find either one of them until last night. The
countryman didn’t know it was Brown that he found drunk
in the house. Folks thought that him and Christmas had
both run, maybe. And then last night Brown showed up.
He was sober then, and he come onto the square about
eight o’clock, wild, yelling about how it was Christmas that
killed her and making his claim on that thousand dollars.
They got the officers and took him to the sheriff’s office and
they told him the reward would be his all right soon as he
caught Christmas and proved he done it. And so Brown
told. He told about how Christmas had been living with
Miss Burden like man and wife for three years, until Brown
and him teamed up. At first, when he moved out to live in
the cabin with Christmas, Brown said that Christmas told
him he had been sleeping in the cabin all the time. Then
he said how one night he hadn’t gone to sleep and he told
how he heard Christmas get up out of bed and come and
stand over Brown’s cot for a while, like he was listening,
and then he tiptoed to the door and opened it quiet and
went out. And Brown said how he got up and followed
Christmas and saw him go up to the big house and go in
the back door, like either it was left open for him or he had
a key to it Then Brown come on back to the cabin and got
into bed. But he said how he couldn’t go to sleep for laugh
ing, thinking about how smart Christmas thought he was.
And he was laying there when Christmas come back in
about a hour. Then he said how he couldn’t keep from
laughing no longer, and he says to Christmas, ‘You old son
of a gun.’ Then he said how Christmas got right still in the
dark, and how he laid there laughing, telling Christmas how
he wasn’t such a slick one after all and joking Christmas



82

about gray hair and about how if Christmas wanted him
to, he would take it week about with him paying the house
rent.

"Then he told how he found out that night that sooner
or later Christmas was going to kill her or somebody. He
said he was laying there, laughing, thinking that Christmas
would just maybe get back in bed again, when Christmas
struck a match. Then Brown said he quit laughing and he
laid there and watched Christinas light the lantern and set
it on the box by Brown's cot Then Brown said how he
wasn’t laughing and he laid there and Christmas standing
there by the cot, looking down at him. "Now you got a good
joke , 7 Christmas says. "You can get a good laugh, telling
them in the barbershop tomorrow night/ And Brown said
he didn’t know that Christmas was mad and that he kind
of said something back to Christmas, not meaning to make
him mad, and Christmas said, in that still way of his: ‘You
dont get enough sleep. You stay awake too much. Maybe
you ought to sleep more,' and Brown said, "How much
more?' and Christmas said, "Maybe from now on/ And
Brown said how he realised then that Christmas was mad
and that it wasn't no time to joke him, and he said, "Aint
we buddies? What would I want to tell something that aint
none of my business? Cant you trust me?' and Christmas
said, "I dont know. I dont care, neither. But you can trust
me/ And he looked at Brown. "Cant you trust me?' and
Brown said he said "Yes/

"And he told then about how he was afraid that Christ-
mas would kill Miss Burden some night, and the sheriff
asked him how come he never reported his fear and Brown
said he thought how maybe by not saying nothing he could
stay out there and prevent it, without having to bother the
officers with it; and the sheriff kind of grunted and said
that was thoughtful of Brown and that Miss Burden would
sholy Appreciate it if she knowed. And then I reckon it be-



83

gun to dawn on Brown that he had a kind of rat smell too.
Because he started m telling about how it was Miss Burden
that bought Christmas that auto and how he would try to
persuade Christmas to quit selling whiskey before he got
them both into trouble; and the officers watching him and
him talking faster and faster and more and more; about
how he had been awake early Saturday morning and saw
Christmas get up about dawn and go out. And Brown knew
where Christmas was going, and about seven o’clock Christ-
mas come back into the cabin and stood there, looking at
Brown. Tve done it/ Christmas says. "Done what?’ Brown
says. "Go up to the house and see/ Christmas says. And
Brown said how he was afraid then, but that he never sus-
pected the truth. He just said that at the outside all he ex-
pected was that maybe Christmas just beat her some. And
he said how Christmas went out again and then he got up
and dressed and he was making a fire to cook his breakfast
when he happened to look out the door and he said how all
the kitchen was afire up at the big house.

"" "What time was this?’ the sheriff says.

“"About eight o’clock, I reckon/ Brown says. "When a
man would naturally be getting up. Unless he is rich. And
God knows I aint that.’

“ "And that fire wasn’t reported until nigh eleven o’clock/
the sheriff says. "And that house was still burning at three
p.M. You mean to say a old wooden house, even a big one*
would need six hours to burn down in?’

“And Brown was setting there, looking this way and that,
with them fellows watching him in a circle, hemming him
in. "I’m just telling you the truth/ Brown says. "That’s what
you asked for/ He was looking this way and that, jerking
his head. Then he kind of hollered: ‘How do I know what
time it was? Do you expect a man doing the work of a nig-
ger slave at a sawmill to be nch enough to own a watch?"

“ "You aint worked at no sawmill nor at anything else in



84

six weeks/ the marshal says. 'And a man that can afford to
ride around all day long m a new car can afford to pass the
courthouse often enough to see the clock and keep up with
the time/

"It wasn't none of my car, I tell you!" Brown says. 'It
was his. She bought it and give it to him, the woman he
murdered give it to him ’

" 'Thats neither here nor there/ the sheriff says. 'Let him
tell the rest of it/

"And so Brown went on then, talking louder and louder
and faster and faster, like he was trying to hide Joe Brown
behind what he was telling on Christmas until Brown could
get his chance to make a grab at that thousand dollars.
It beats all how some folks think that making or getting
money is a kind of game where there are not any rules at
all. He told about how even when he saw the fire, he never
dreamed that she would still be in the house, let alone
dead. He said how he never even thought to look into the
house at all; that he was just figuring on how to put out the
fire.

" 'And that was round eight a.m./ the sheriff says. 'Or so
you claim. And Hamp Waller’s wife never reported that
fire until nigh eleven. It took you a light smart while to find
out you couldn’t put out that fire with your bare hands/
And Brown sitting there m the middle of them (they had
locked the door, but the windows was lined with folks’
faces against the glass) with his eyes going this way and
that and his lip lifted away from his teeth. 'Hamp says that
after he broke m the door, there was already a man inside
that house/ the sheriff says. 'And that that man tried to
keep him from going up the stairs/ And him setting there
in die center of them, with his eyes going and going

"I reckon he was desperate by then. I reckon he could
not only see that thousand dollars getting further and fur-
ther away from him, but that he could begin to see some-



85

body else getting it. I reckon it was like he could see himself
with that thousand dollars right in his hand for somebody
else to have the spending of it. Because they said it was like
he had been saving what he told them next for just such a
tune as this. Like he had knowed that if it come to a pinch,
this would save him, even if it was almost worse for a white
man to admit what he would have to admit than to be ac-
cused of the murder itself. Thafs right/ he says. ‘Go on.
Accuse me Accuse the white man thafs trying to help you
with what he knows. Accuse the white man and let the
nigger go free. Accuse the white and let the nigger run/

“‘Nigger?" the sheriff said. ‘Nigger?"

“If s like he knew he had them then. Like nothing they
could believe he had done would be as bad as what he
could tell that somebody else had done. ‘You re so smart,"
he says. ‘The folks in this town is so smart. Fooled for three
years. Calling him a foreigner for three years, when soon
as I watched him three days I knew he wasn’t no more a
foreigner than I am. I knew before he even told me him-
self/ And them watching him now, and looking now and
then at one another.

‘“You better be careful what you are saying, if it is a
white man you are talking about/ the marshal says. ‘I dont
care if he is a murderer or not."

“Tm talking about Christmas/ Brown says. ‘The man
that killed that white woman after he had done lived with
her in plain sight of this whole town, and you all letting
him get further and further away while you are accusing
the one fellow that can find him for you, that knows what
he done. He"s got nigger blood in him. I knowed it when
I first saw him. But you folks, you smart sheriffs and such.
One time he even admitted it, told me he was part nigger.
Maybe he was drunk when he done it: I dont know. Any™
way, the next morning after he told me he come to me and
he says (Brown was talking fast now, land of glaring his



86


eyes and his teeth both aiound at them, from one to an-
other), he said to me, “I made a mistake last night Dont
you make the same one ” And I said, "How do you mean a
mistake?” and he said, "You think a minute,” and I thought
about something he done one night when me and him was
in Memphis and I knowed my life wouldn't be worth noth-
ing if I ever crossed him and so I said, “I reckon I know
what you mean. I aint going to meddle in what amt none
of my business. I aint never done that yet, that I know of.”
And youd have said that, too,' Brown says, way out there,
alone in that cabin with him and nobody to hear you if you
was to holler. You'd have been scared too, until the folks
you was trying to help turned in and accused you of the
killing you never done/ And there he sat, with his eyes go-
ing and going, and them in the room watching him and
the faces pressed against the window from outside.

" 'A nigger/ the marshal said. 1 always thought there was
something funny about that fellow/

"Then the sheriff talked to Brown again. "And that's why
you didn't tell what was going on out there until tonight?'

"And Brown setting there in the midst of them, with his
lips snarled back and that little scar by his mouth white as
a popcorn. "You just show me the man that would a done
different/ he says. "That's all I ask. Just show me the man
that would a lived with him enough to know him like I
done, and done different/

"""Well/ the sheriff says, "I believe you are telling the
truth at last. You go on with Buck, now, and get a good
sleep. Ill attend to Christmas/

"1 reckon that means the jail/ Brown say s. "I reckon
youll lock me up m jail while you get the reward/

"" "You shut your mouth/ the sheriff says, not mad. "If that
reward is yours, I'll see that you get it. Take him on, Buck/
""The marshal come over and touched Brown s shoulder
and be got up. When they went out the door the ones that



87

had been watching through the window crowded up: ‘Have
you got him, Buck? Is he the one that done it?”

“ ‘No/ Buck says. ‘You boys get on home. Get on to bed,

9 99

now.

Byron s voice ceases. Its flat, inflectionless, countrybred
singsong dies into silence. He is now looking at Hightower
with that look compassionate and troubled and still, watch-
ing across the desk the man who sits there with his eyes
closed and the sweat running down his face like tears.
Hightower speaks: “Is it certain, proved, that he has Negro
blood? Think, Byron; what it will mean when the people
— if they catch . . . Poor man. Poor mankind.*

“That's what Brown says,* Byron says, his tone quiet,
stubborn, convinced. “And even a liar can be scared into
telling the truth, same as a honest man can be tortured into
telling a lie.*

“Yes * Hightower says. He sits with his eyes closed, erect
“But they have not caught him yet. They have not caught
him yet, Byron.*

Neither is Byron looking at the other. “Not yet. Not the
last I heard. They took some bloodhounds out there today.
But they hadn't caught him when I heard last*

“And Brown?*

“Brown,* Byron says. “Him. He went with them. He may
have helped Christmas do it. But I dont reckon so. I reckon
that setting fire to the house was about his limit. And why
he done that, if he did, I reckon even he dont know. Unless
maybe he thought that if the whole thing was just burned
up, it would kind of not ever been at all, and then him and
Christmas could go on riding around in that new car. I
reckon he figured that what Christmas committed was not
so much a sin as a mistake.* His face is musing, downlook-
ing; agam it cracks faintly, with a kind of sardonic weari-
ness. “I reckon he's safe enough. I reckon she can find him
now any time she wants, provided him and the sheriff aint



88

out with the dogs. He aint trying to run — not with that
thousand dollars hanging over his head, you might say. I
reckon he wants to catch Christmas worse than any man of
them. He goes with them. They take him out of the jail and
he goes along with them, and then they all come back to
town and lock Brown up again. It’s right queer. Kind of a
murderer trying to catch himself to get his own reward. He
dont seem to mmd though, except to begrudge the time
while they aint out on the tiail, the time wasted setting
down. Yes. IT1 tell her tomorrow. Ill just tell her that he is
in hock for the time being, him and them two dogs. Maybe
111 take her to town where she can see them, all three of
them hitched to the other men, a-straining and yapping.”

“You haven’t told her yet.”

“I amt told her. Nor him. Because he might run again, re-
ward or no reward And maybe if he can catch Christmas
and get that reward, he will marry her in time. But she dont
know yet, no more than she knowed yesterday when she
got down from that wagon on the square. Swolebellied,
getting down slow from that strange wagon, among them
strange faces, telling herself with a kind of quiet astonish-
ment, only I dont reckon it was any astonishment m it,
because she had come slow and afoot and telling never
bothered her; ‘My, my. Here 1 have come clean from Ala-
bama, and now I am in Jefferson at last, sure enough/ ”



5


IT WAS AFTER MIDNIGHT. THOUGH CHRISTMAS HAD BEEN IN

bed for two hours, he was not yet asleep. He heard Brown
before he saw him. He heard Brown approach the door and
then blunder into it, in silhouette propping himself erect
in the door. Brown was breathing heavily. Standing there
between his propped arms, Brown began to sing in a sac*
charine and nasal tenor. The very longdrawn pitch of his
voice seemed to smell of whiskey. "Shut it,” Christmas said.
He did not move and his voice was not raised. Yet Brown
ceased at once. He stood for a moment longer in the door,
propping himself upright. Then he let go of the door and
Christmas heard him stumble into the room; a moment later
he blundered into something. There was an interval filled
with hard, labored breathing. Then Brown fell to the floor
with a tremendous clatter, striking the cot on which Christ-
mas lay and filling the room with loud and idiot laughter.

Christmas rose from his cot. Invisible beneath him Brown
lay on the floor, laughing, making no effort to rise. "Shut
it!” Christmas said. Brown still laughed, Christmas stepped
across Brown and put his hand out toward where a wooden
box that served for table sat, on which the lantern and
matches were kept But he could not find the box, and then

8f



90

he remembered the sound of the breaking lantern when
Brown fell He stooped, astride Brown, and found his collar
and hauled him out from beneath the cot and raised
Brown s head and began to strike him with his flat hand,
short, vicious, and hard, until Brown ceased laughing*

Brown was limp. Christmas held his head up, cm sing
him m a voice level as whispering. He dragged Brown over
to the other cot and flung him onto it, face up. Brown
began to laugh again. Christmas put his hand flat upon
Brown s mouth and nose, shutting his jaw with his left hand
while with the right he struck Brown again with those hard,
slow, measured blows, as if he were meting them out by-
count. Brown had stopped laughing. He struggled. Beneath
Christmas's hand he began to make a choked, gurgling
noise, struggling. Christmas held him until he ceased and
became still. Then Christmas slacked his hand a little. "Will
you be quiet now?” he said. "Will you?”

Brown struggled again. "Take your black hand off of me,
you damn niggerblooded — ” The hand shut down again.
Again Christmas struck him with the other hand upon the
face. Brown ceased and lay still again. Christmas slacked
his hand. After a moment Brown spoke, in a tone cunning,
not loud: "You re a nigger, see? You said so yourself. You
told me. But Im white. I'm a wh — ” The hand shut down.
Again Brown struggled, making a choked whimpering
sound beneath the hand, drooling upon the fingers When
he stopped struggling, the hand slacked. Then he lay still,
breathing hard.

"Will you now?” Christmas said.

"Yes,” Brown said. He breathed noisily. "Let me breathe.
Ill be quiet Let me breathe ”

Christmas slacked his hand but he did not remove it. Be-
neath it Brown breathed easier, his breath came and went
easier, with less noise. But Christmas did not remove the
hand. He stood m the darkness above the prone body.



91

with Brown’s breath alternately hot and cold on his fingers,
thinking quietly Something is going to happen to me . I am
going to do something Without removing his left hand
from Brown’s face he could reach with his right across to
his cot, to his pillow beneath which lay his razor with its
five-inch blade. But he did not do it. Perhaps thinking had
already gone far enough and dark enough to tell him This
is not the right one Anyway he did not reach for the razor.
After a time he removed his hand from Brown’s face. But
he did not go away. Pie still stood above the cot, his own
breathing so quiet, so calm, as to make no sound even to
himself. Invisible too, Brown breathed quieter now, and
after a while Christmas returned and sat upon his cot and
fumbled a cigarette and a match from his trousers hanging
on the wall. In the flare of the match Brown was visible.
Before taking the light, Christmas lifted the match and
looked at Brown. Brown lay on his back, sprawled, one arm
dangling to the floor. His mouth was open. While Christ-
mas watched, he began to snore.

Christmas lit the cigarette and snapped the match to-
ward the open door, watching the flame vanish in midair.
Then he was listening for the light, trivial sound which the
dead match would make when it struck the floor; and then
it seemed to him that he heard it. Then it seemed to him,
sitting on the cot in the dark room, that he was hearing a
myriad sounds of no greater volume — voices, murmurs,
whispers: of trees, darkness, earth; people: his own voice;
other voices evocative of names and times and places —
which he had been conscious of all his life without know-
ing it, which were his life, thinking God perhaps and me
not knowing that too He could see it like a printed sen-
tence, fullborn and already dead God loves me too like
the faded and weathered letters on a last years billboard
God loves me too

He smoked the cigarette down without once touching it



92

with his hand. He snapped it too toward the door. Unlike
the match, it did not vanish in midflight. He watched it
twinkle end over end through the door. He lay back on the
cot, his hands behind his head, as a man lies who does not
expect to sleep, thinking I have been in bed now since ten
o clock and 1 have not gone to sleep . I do not know what
time it is but it is later than midnight and I have not yet
been asleep “It’s because she started praying over me,” he
said. He spoke aloud, his voice sudden and loud in the
dark room, above Brown’s drunken snoring. “That’s it. Be-
cause she started praying over me.”

He rose from the cot. His bare feet made no sound. He
stood in the darkness, in his underclothes. On the other cot
Brown snored. For a moment Christmas stood, his head
turned toward the sound. Then he went on toward the
door. In his underclothes and barefoot he left the cabin. It
was a little lighter outdoors. Overhead the slow constella-
tions wheeled, the stars of which he had been aware for
thirty years and not one of which had any name to him or
meant anything at all by shape or brightness or position.
Ahead, rising from out a close mass of trees, he could see
one chimney and one gable of the house. The house itself
was invisible and dark. No light shone and no sound came
from it when he approached and stood beneath the window
of the room where she slept, thinking If she is asleep too .
If she is asleep The doors were never locked, and it used
to be that at whatever hour between dark and dawn that
the desire took him, he would enter the house and go to
her bedroom and take his sure way through the darkness
to her bed. Sometimes she would be awake and waiting
and she would speak his name. At others he would waken
her with his hard brutal hand and sometimes take her as
hard and as brutally before she was good awake.

That was two years ago, two years behind them now,
thinking Perhaps that is where outrage hes. Perhaps I be -



93

lieve that I have been tricked , fooled. That she lied to me
about her age , about what happens to women at a certain
age He said, aloud, solitary, in the darkness beneath the
dark window; "She ought not to started praying over me.
She would have been all right if she hadn’t started praying
over me. It was not her fault that she got too old to be any
good any more. But she ought to have had better sense than
to pray over me.” He began to curse her. He stood beneath
the dark window, cursing her with slow and calculated ob-
scenity. He was not looking at the window. In the less than
halflight he appeared to be watching his body, seeming to
watch it turning slow and lascivious in a whispering of
gutter filth like a drowned corpse in a thick still black poo!
of more than water. He touched himself with his flat hands,
hard, drawing his hands hard up his abdomen and chest
inside his undergarment. It was held together by a single
button at the top. Once he had owned garments with intact
buttons. A woman had sewed them on. That was for a time,
during a time. Then the time passed. After that he would
purloin his own garments from the family wash before she
could get to them and replace the missing buttons. When
she foiled him he set himself deliberately to learn and re-
member which buttons were missing and had been restored.
With his pocket knife and with the cold and bloodless de-
liberation of a surgeon he would cut off the buttons which
she had just replaced.

His right hand slid fast and smooth as the knife blade
had ever done, up the opening in the garment Edgewise
it struck the remaining button a light, swift blow. The dark
air breathed upon him, breathed smoothly as the garment
slipped down his legs, the cool mouth of darkness, the soft
cool tongue. Moving again, he could feel the dark air like
water; he could feel the dew under his feet as he had never
felt dew before. He passed through the broken gate and
stopped beside the road. The August weeds were thightaflL



94

Upon the leaves and stalks dust of a month of passing wag-
ons lay. The road ran before him. It was a little paler than
the darkness of trees and earth. In one direction town lay.
In the other the road rose to a hill. After a time a light began
to grow beyond the hill, defining it. Then he could hear the
car. He did not move. He stood with his hands on his hips,
naked, thighdeep in the dusty weeds, while the car came
over the hill and approached, the lights full upon him.
He watched his body grow white out of the darkness like
a kodak print emerging from the liquid. He looked straight
into the headlights as it shot past. From it a woman’s shrill
voice flew back, shrieking. “White bastards!” he shouted.
“That’s not the first of your bitches that ever saw . . ” But
the car was gone. There was no one to hear, to listen. It was
gone, sucking its dust and its light with it and behind it,
sucking with it the white womans fading cry. He was cold
now. It was as though he had merely come there to be pres-
ent at a finality, and the finality had now occurred and he
was free again. He returned to the house. Beneath the dark
window he paused and hunted and found his undergarment
and put it on. There was no remaining button at all now
and he had to hold it together as he returned to the cabin.
Already he could hear Brown snoring. He stood for a while
at the door, motionless and silent, listening to the long,
harsh, uneven suspirations ending each in a choked gurgle.
1 must have hurt his nose more than I knew/ he thought
"Damn son of a bitch/ He entered and went to his cot, pre-
paring to he down. He was in the act of reclining when he
stopped, halted, halfreelining. Perhaps the thought of him-
self lying there until daylight, with the drunken man snor-
ing m the darkness and the intervals filled with the myriad
voices, was more than he could bear. Because he sat up
and fumbled quietly beneath his cot and found his shoes
and slipped them on and took from the cot the single half
cotton blanket which composed his bedding, and left the



95

cabin. About three hundred yards away the stable stood.
It was falling down and there had not been a horse in it in
thirty years, yet it was toward the stable that he went. He
was walking quite fast. He was thinking now, aloud now.
Why in hell do I want to smell horses?’ Then he said, fum-
bling; “It’s because they are not women. Even a mare horse
is a kind of man ”

He slept less than two hours. When he waked dawn was
just beginning. Lying in the single blanket upon the loosely
planked floor of the sagging and gloomy cavern acrid
with the thin dust of departed hay and faintly ammoniac
with that breathless desertion of old stables, he could see
through the shutterless window in the eastern wall the
primrose sky and the high, pale morning star of full sum-
mer.

He felt quite rested, as if he had slept an unbroken eight
hours. It was the unexpected sleep, since he had not ex-
pected to sleep at all. With his feet again in the unlaced
shoes and the folded blanket beneath his arm he descended
the perpendicular ladder, feeling for the rotting and invisi-
ble rungs with his feet, lowering himself from rung to rung
in onehanded swoops. He emerged into the gray and yei
low of dawn, the clean chill, breathing it deep.

The cabin now stood sharp against 'the increasing east*
and the clump of trees also within which the house was
hidden save for the single chimney. The dew was heavy in
the tall grass. His shoes were wet at once. The leather was
cold to his feet; against his bare legs the wet grass blades
were like strokes of limber icicles. Brown had stopped snor-
ing. When Christmas entered he could see Brown by the
light from the eastern window. He breathed quietly now.
‘Sober now/ Christmas thought. ‘Sober and dont know it
Poor bastard/ He looked at Brown. ‘Poor bastard. He’ll be
mad when he wakes up and finds out that he is sober again.



96

Take him maybe a whole hour to get back drunk again/
He put down the blanket and dressed, in the serge trousers,
the white shirt a bttle soiled now, the bow tie He was
smoking Nailed to the wall was a shard of mirror. In the
fragment he watched his dim face as he knotted the tie.
The stiff hat hung on a nail. He did not take it down. He
took instead a cloth cap from another nail, and from the
floor beneath his cot a magazme of that type whose covers
bear either pictures of young women in underclothes or
pictures of men in the act of shooting one another with pis-
tols. From beneath the pillow on his cot he took his razor
and a brush and a stick of shaving soap and put them into
his pocket.

When he left the cabin it was quite light. The birds were
In full chorus. This time he turned his back on the house.
He went on past the stable and entered the pasture beyond
it His shoes and his trouser legs were soon soppmg with
gray dew. He paused and rolled his trousers gingerly to his
knees and went on. At the end of the pasture woods began.
The dew was not so heavy here, and he rolled his trousers
down again. After a while he came to a small valley in
which a spring rose. He put down the magazine and gath-
ered twigs and dried brush and made a fire and sat, his
back against a tree and his feet to the blaze. Presently his
wet shoes began to steam. Then he could feel the heat mov-
ing up his legs, and then all of a sudden he opened his eyes
and saw the high sun and that the fire had burned com-
pletely out, and he knew that he had been asleep. ‘Damned
if I haven’t/ he thought. ‘Damned if I haven’t slept again/

He had slept more than two hours this time, because the
ran was shining down upon the spring itself, glinting and
glancing upon the ceaseless water. He rose, stretching his
cramped and stiffened back, waking his tingling muscles.
From his pocket he took the razor, the brush, the soap.
Kneeling beside the spring he shaved, using the water’s sur-



97

face for glass, stropping the long bright razor on his shoe.

He concealed the shavmg things and the magazine in a
clump of bushes and put on the tie again. When he left the
spring he bore now well away from the house. When he
reached the road he was a half mile beyond the house. A
short distance farther on stood a small store with a gasoline
pump before it. He entered the store and a woman sold
him crackers and a tin of potted meat. He returned to the
spring, the dead fire.

He ate his breakfast with his back against the tree, read-
ing the magazine while he ate. He had previously read but
one story; he began now upon the second one, reading the
magazine straight through as though it were a novel. Now
and then he would look up from the page, chewing, into
the sunshot leaves which arched the ditch. "Maybe I have
already done it,’ he thought. "Maybe it is no longer now
waiting to be done/ It seemed to him that he could see the
yellow day opening peacefully on before him, like a corri-
dor, an arras, into a still chiaroscuro without urgency. It
seemed to him that as he sat there the yellow day contem-
plated him drowsily, like a prone and somnolent yellow cat.
Then he read again. He turned the pages in steady progres-
sion, though now and then he would seem to linger upon
one page, one line, perhaps one word. He would not look
up then. He would not move, apparently arrested and held
immobile by a single word which had perhaps not yet
impacted, his whole being suspended by the single trivial
combination of letters in quiet and sunny space, so that
hanging motionless and without physical weight he seemed
to watch the slow flowing of time beneath him, thinking
All I wanted was peace thinking, "She ought not to started
praying over me/

When he reached the last story he stopped reading and
counted the remaining pages. Then he looked at the sun
and read again. He read now like a man walking along a



98

street might count the cracks in the pavement, to the last
and final page, the last and final word Then he rose and
struck a match to the magazine and prodded it patiently
until it was consumed. With the shaving things in his
pocket he went on down the ditch.

After a while it broadened: a smooth, sandblanched floor
between steep shelving walls choked, flank and crest, with
brier and brush. Over it trees still arched, and in a small
cove in one flank a mass of dead brush lay, filling the cove.
He began to drag the brush to one side, dealing the cove
and exposing a short handled shovel. With the shovel he
began to dig in the sand which the brush had concealed,
exhuming one by one six metal tins with screw tops. He
did not unscrew the caps. He laid the tins on their sides
and with the sharp edge of the shovel he pierced them, the
sand beneath them darkening as the whiskey spurted and
poured, the sunny solitude, the air, becoming redolent with
alcohol. He emptied them thoroughly, unhurried, his face
completely cold, masklike almost When they were all
empty he tumbled them back into the hole and buried them
roughly and dragged the brush back and hid the shovel
again. The brush hid the stain but it could not hide the
scent, the smell. He looked at the sun again. It was now
afternoon.

At seven o'clock that evening he was in town, in a res-
taurant on a side street, eating his supper, sitting on a back-
less stool at a frictionsmooth wooden counter, eating.

At nine o'clock he was standing outside the barbershop,
looking through the window at the man whom he had
taken for a partner. He stood quite still, with his hands in
his trousers and cigarette smoke drifting across his still face
and the cloth cap worn, like the stiff hat, at that angle at
once swaggering and baleful. So cold, so baleful he stood
there that Brown mside the shop, among the lights, the air



99

heavy with lotion and hot soap, gestieulant, thickvoiced, in
the soiled redbarred trousers and the soiled colored shirt,
looked up in midvoice and with his drunken eyes looked
into the eyes of the man beyond the glass. So stil 1 and bale-
ful that a Negro youth shuffling up the street whistling saw
Christmas s profile and ceased whistling and edged away
and slid past behind him, turning, looking back over his
shoulder. But Christmas was moving himself now. It was
as if he had just paused there for Brown to look at him.

He went on, not fast, away from the square. The street,
a quiet one at all times, was deserted at this hour. It led
down through the Negro section, Freedman Town, to the
station. At seven o clock he would have passed people,
white and black, going toward the square and the picture
show; at half past nine they would have been going back
home. But the picture show had not turned out yet, and he
now had the street to himself. He went on, passing still be-
tween the homes of white people, from street lamp to street
lamp, the heavy shadows of oak and maple leaves sliding
like scraps of black velvet across his white s hir t. Nothing
can look quite as lonely as a big man going along an empty
street. Yet though he was not large, not tall, he contrived
somehow to look more lonely than a lone telephone pole
in the middle of a desert. In the wide, empty, shadow-
brooded street he looked like a phantom, a spirit, strayed
out of its own world, and lost.

Then he found himself. Without his being aware the
street had begun to slope and before he knew it he was in
Freedman Town, surrounded by the summer smell and the
summer voices of invisible Negroes. They seemed to enclose
him like bodiless voices murmuring, talking, laughing, in
a language not his. As from the bottom of a thick black pit
he saw himself enclosed by cabinshapes, vague, kerosene-
lit, so that the street lamps themselves seemed to be farther
spaced, as if the black life, the black breathing had com-



100

pounded the substance of breath so that not only voices
but moving bodies and light itself must become fluid and
accrete slowly from particle to particle, of and with the now
ponderable night mseparable and one.

He was standing still now, breathing quite hard, glar-
ing this way and that. About him the cabins were shaped
blackly out of blackness by the faint, sultry glow of kero-
sene lamps. On all sides, even within him, the bodiless
fecundmellow voices of Negro women murmured. It was as
though he and all other manshaped life about him had been
returned to the lightless hot wet primo genitive Female.
He began to run, glaring, his teeth glaring, his inbreath
cold on his dry teeth and bps, toward the next street lamp.
Beneath it a narrow and rutted lane turned and mounted
to the parallel street, out of the black hollow. He turned
into it running and plunged up the sharp ascent, his heart
hammering, and mto the higher street. He stopped here,
panting, glaring, his heart thudding as if it could not or
would not yet believe that the air now was the cold hard
air of white people.

Then he became cool. The Negro smell, the Negro voices,
were behind and below him now. To his left lay the
square, the clustered lights; low bright birds in stillwmged
and tremulous suspension. To the right the street lamps
marched on, spaced, intermittent with bitten and unstir-
ring branches. He went on, slowly again, his back toward
the square, passing again between the houses of white peo-
ple. There were people on these porches too, and in chairs
upon the lawns, but he could walk quiet here. Now and
then he could see them: heads in silhouette, a white blurred
garmented shape; on a lighted veranda four people sat
about a card table, the white faces intent and sharp in the
low light, the bare arms of the women glaring smooth and
white above the trivial cards "That’s all I wanted/ he
thought. That dont seem like a whole lot to ask.’



101

This street in turn began to slope. But it sloped safely
His steady white shirt and pacing dark legs died among
long shadows bulging square and huge against the August
stars: a cotton warehouse, a horizontal and cylindrical tank
like the torso of a beheaded mastodon, a line of freight cars.
He crossed the tracks, the rails coming momentarily into
twin green glints from a switch lamp, glinting away again.
Beyond the tracks woods began. But he found the path un-
erringly. It mounted, among the trees, the lights of the
town now beginning to come into view again across the
valley where the railroad ran. But he did not look back
until he reached the crest of the hill. Then he could see the
town, the glare, the individual lights where streets radiated
from the square. He could see the street down which he
had come, and the other street, the one which had almost
betrayed him; and farther away and at right angles, the far
bright rampart of the town itself, and in the angle between
the black pit from which he had fled with dr ummin g heart
and glaring lips. No light came from it, from here no breath,
no odor. It just lay there, black, impenetrable, in its gar-
land of Augusttremulous lights. It might have been the
original quarry, abyss itself.

His way was sure, despite the trees, the darkness. He
never once lost the path which he could not even see. The
woods continued for a mile. He emerged into a road, with
dust under his feet. He could see now, the vague spreading
world, the horizon. Here and there faint windows glowed.
But most of the cabins were dark. Nevertheless his blood
began again, talking and talking. He walked fast, in time
to it; he seemed to be aware that the group were Negroes
before he could have seen or heard them at all, before they
even came in sight vaguely against the defunctive dust.
There were five or six of them, in a straggling body yet
vaguely paired, again there reached him, above the noise
of his own blood, the rich murmur of womenvoices. He



102

was walking directly toward them, walking fast. They had
seen him and they gave to one side of the road, the voices
ceasing He too changed direction, crossing toward them
as if he intended to walk them down. In a single movement
and as though at a spoken command the women faded back
and were going around him, giving him a wide berth. One
of the men followed them as if he were driving them before
him, looking over his shoulder as he passed. The other two
men had halted in the road, facing Christmas, Christmas
had stopped also. Neither seemed to be moving, yet they
approached, looming, like two shadows drifting up. He
could smell Negro; he could smell cheap cloth and sweat
The head of the Negro, higher than his own, seemed to
stoop, out of the sky, against the sky. “It’s a white man”
he said, without turning his head, quietly. “What you want,
whitefolks? You looking for somebody?” The voice was not
threatful. Neither was it servile.

“Come on away from there, Jupe ” the one who had fol-
lowed the women said.

“Who you looking for, cap’m?” the Negro said.

“Jupe,” one of the women said, her voice a little high.
“You come on, now.”

For a moment longer the two heads, the light and the
dark, seemed to hang suspended in the darkness, breathing
upon one another. Then the Negro s head seemed to float
away, a cool wind blew from somewhere. Christmas, turn-
ing slowly, watching them dissolve and fade again into the
pale road, found that he had the razor in his hand. It was
not open. It was not from fear. “Bitches!” he said, quite
loud. “Sons of bitches!”

The wind blew dark and cool; the dust even through his
shoes was cool. 'What in hell is the matter with me^ he
thought He put the razor back into his pocket and stopped
and lit a cigarette. He had to moisten his lips several times
to hold the cigarette. In the light of the match he could



io&

watch his own hands shake. "All this trouble/ he thought
“All this damn trouble/" he said aloud, walking again. He
looked up at the stars, the sky. "It must be near ten now/
he thought, and then almost with the thought he heard the
clock on the courthouse two miles away. Slow, measured,
clear the ten strokes came. He counted them, stopped again
in the lonely and empty road. "Ten o clock/ he thought. "I
heard ten strike last night too. And eleven. And twelve. But
I didn't hear one. Maybe the wind had changed/

When he heard eleven strike tonight he was sitting with
his back against a tree inside the broken gate, while behind
him again the house was dark and hidden in its shaggy
grove. He was not thinking Maybe she is not asleep either
tonight. He was not thinking at all now, thinking had not
begun now; the voices had not begun now either. He just
sat there, not moving, until after a while he heard the clock
two miles away stake twelve. Then he rose and moved
toward the house. He didn't go fast. He didn't think even
then Something is going to happen . Something is going to
happen to me



6


MEMORY BELIEVES BEFORE KNOWING REMEMBERS. BE-

lieves longer than recollects, longer than knowing even
wonders. Knows remembers believes a corridor in a big
long garbled cold echoing building of dark red brick soot-
bleakened by more chimneys than its own, set in a grass-
less cinderstrewnpacked compound surrounded by smoking
factory purlieus and enclosed by a ten foot steel-and-wire
fence like a penitentiary or a zoo, where in random erratic
surges, with sparrowhke, childtrebling orphans in identical
and uniform blue denim in and out of remembering but in
knowing constant as the bleak walls, the bleak windows
where in rain soot from the yearly adjacenting chimneys
streaked like black tears.

In the quiet and empty corridor, during the quiet hour
of early afternoon, he was like a shadow, small even for
five years, sober and quiet as a shadow. Another in the cor-
ridor could not have said just when and where he vanished,
into what door, what room. But there was no one else in
the corridor at this hour He knew that. He had been doing
this for almost a year, ever smce the day when he discov-
ered by accident the toothpaste which the dietitian used.

Once in the room, he went directly on his bare and silent
104



105

feet to the washstand and found the tube. He was watching
the pink worm coil smooth and cool and slow onto his
parchmentcolored finger when he heard footsteps in the
corridor and then voices just beyond the door. Perhaps he
recognised the dietitian s voice. Anyway, he did not wait to
see if they were going to pass the door or not. With the tube
in his hand and still silent as a shadow on his bare feet he
crossed the room and slipped beneath a cloth curtain which
screened off one comer of the room. Here he squatted,
among delicate shoes and suspended soft womangarments.
Crouching, he heard the dietitian and her companion enter
the room

The dietitian was nothing to him yet, save a mechanical
adjunct to eating, food, the diningroom, the ceremony of
eating at the wooden forms, coming now and then into
his vision without impacting at all except as something of
pleasing association and pleasing in herself to look at —
young, a little fullbodied, smooth, pink-and-white, making
his mind think of the diningroom, making his mouth think
of something sweet and sticky to eat, and also pinkcolored
and surreptitious. On that first day when he discovered the
toothpaste in her room he had gone directly there, who had
never heard of toothpaste either, as if he already knew that
she would possess something of that nature and he would
find it. He knew the voice of her companion also. It was
that of a young interne from the county hospital who was
assistant to the parochial doctor, he too a familiar figure
about the house and also not yet an enemy.

He was safe now, behind the curtain. When they went
away, he would replace the toothpaste and also leave. So
he squatted behind the curtain, hearing without listening
to it the womans tense whispering voice. “No! No! Not
here. Not now. Theyll catch us. Somebody will — No,
Charley! Please*” The mans words he could not under-
stand at all. The voice was lowered too. It had a ruthless



106

sound, as the voices of all men did to him yet, since he was
too young yet to escape from the world of women for that
brief respite before he escaped back into it to remain until
the hour of his death. He heard other sounds which he did
know; a scuffing as of feet, the turn of the key in the door.
“No, Charley! Charley, please f Please, Charley 1 ” the wom-
an's whisper said. He heard other sounds, rustlings, whis-
perings, not voices. He was not listening; he was just
waiting, thinking without particular interest or attention
that it was a strange hour to be going to bed. Again the
woman's fainting whisper came through the thin curtain:
Tm scared 1 Hurry! Hurry!”

He squatted among the soft womansmelling garments
and the shoes. He saw by feel alone now the ruined, once
cylindrical tube. By taste and not seeing he contemplated
the cool invisible worm as it coiled onto his finger and
smeared sharp, automatonlike and sweet, into his mouth.
By ordinary he would have taken a single mouthful and
then replaced the tube and left the room. Even at five, he
knew that he must not take more than that. Perhaps it was
the animal warning him that more would make him sick;
perhaps the human being warning him that if he took more
than that, she would miss it. This was the first time he had
taken more. By now, hiding and waiting, he had taken a
good deal more. By feel he could see the diminishing tube.
He began to sweat. Then he found that he had been sweat-
ing for some time, that for some time now he had been do-
ing nothing else but sweating. He was not hearing anything
at all now. Very likely he would not have heard a gunshot
beyond the curtain. He seemed to be turned in upon him-
self, watching himself sweating, watching himself smear
another worm of paste into his mouth which his stomach
did not want. Sure enough, it refused to go down. Motion*
less now, utterly contemplative, he seemed to stoop above
himself like a chemist in his laboratory, waiting. He didn't



107

have to wait long. At once the paste which he had already
swallowed lifted inside him, trying to get back out, into the
air where it was cool. It was no longer sweet. In the rife,
pinkwomansmelling obscurity behind the curtain he squat-
ted, pmkfoamed, listening to his insides, waiting with as-
tonished fatalism for what was about to happen to him.
Then it happened He said to himself with complete and
passive surrender* ‘Well, here I am/

When the curtain fled back he did not look up. When
hands dragged him violently out of his vomit he did not
resist. He hung from the hands, limp, looking with slack-
jawed and glassy idiocy into a face no longer smooth pink-
and-white, surrounded now by wild and dishevelled hair
whose smooth bands once made him think of candy. “You
little rat!” the thin, furious voice hissed; “you little rat! Spy-
ing on me ! You little nigger bastard!”

The dietitian was twentyseven — old enough to have to
take a few amorous risks but still young enough to attach
a great deal of importance not so much to love, but to be-
ing caught at it. She was also stupid enough to believe that
a child of five not only could deduce the truth from what
he had heard, but that he would want to tell it as an adult
would. So when during the following two days she could
seem to look nowhere and be nowhere without finding the
child watching her with th6 "profound and intent interroga-
tion of an animal, she foisted upon him more of the attri-
butes of an adult: she believed that he not only intended to
tell, but that he deferred doing it deliberately in order to
make her suffer more. It never occurred to her that he be-
lieved that he was the one who had been taken in sin and
was being tortured with punishment deferred and that he
was putting himself in her way in order to get it over with,
get his whipping and strike the balance and write it off.

By the second day she was well nigh desperate. She did



108

not sleep at night. She lay most of the night now tense,
teeth and hands clenched, panting with fury and terror
and worst of all, regret: that blind fury to turn back time
just for an hour, a second. This was to the exclusion of even
love during the time. The young doctor was now even less
than the child, merely an instrument of her disaster and
not even that of her salvation. She could not have said
which she hated most. She could not even say when she was
asleep and when she was awake. Because always agamst
her eyelids or upon her retinae was that still, grave, ines-
capable, parchmentcolored face watching her.

On the third day she came out of the coma state, the
waking sleep through which during the hours of light and
faces she carried her own face like an aching mask in a
fixed grimace of dissimulation that dared not flag On the
third day she acted. She had no trouble finding him. It was
in the corridor, the empty corridor during the quiet hour
after dinner. He was there, domg nothing at all. Perhaps he
had followed her. No one else could have said if he were
waiting there or not. But she found him without surprise
and he heard and turned and saw her without surprise:
the two faces, the one no longer smooth pink-and-white,
the other grave, sobereyed, perfectly empty of everything
except waiting. "Now I’ll get it over with,’ he thought

“listen,” she said. Then she stopped, looking at him. It
was as though she could not think what to say next. The
child waited, still, motionless. Slowly and gradually the
muscles of his backside were becoming flat and rigid and
tense as boards. “Are you going to telP” she said.

He didn’t answer. He believed that anyone should have
known that the last thing in the world he would do would
be to tell about the toothpaste, the vomit. He was not look*
ing at her face. He was watching her hands, waiting. One
of them was clenched inside her skirt pocket. Through the



109

cloth he could see that it was clenched hard. He had neve*
been struck with a fist. Yet neither had he ever waited three
days to be punished. When he saw the hand emerge from
the pocket he believed that she was about to strike him*
But she did not, the hand just opened beneath his eyes.
Upon it lay a silver dollar. Her voice was thin, urgent, whis-
pering, though the corridor was empty about them. "You
can buy a lot with this. A whole dollar.” He had never seen
a dollar before, though he knew what it was He looked at
it. He wanted it as he would have wanted the bright cap
from a beer bottle But he did not believe that she would
give it to him, because he would not give it to her if it were
his. He didn't know what she wanted him to do. He was
waiting to get whipped and then be released. Her voice
went on, urgent, tense, fast: "A whole dollar. See? How
much you could buy. Some to eat every day for a week;
And next month maybe 111 give you another one.”

He did not move nor speak. He might have been carven,
a large toy: small, still, round headed and round eyed, in
overalls. He was still with astonishment, shock, outrage.
Looking at the dollar, he seemed to see ranked tubes of
toothpaste like corded wood, endless and terrifying; his
whole being coiled in a rich and passionate revulsion. "I
dont want no more,” he said. 1 dont never want no more/
he thought.

Then he didn't dare even look at her face. He could feel
her, hear her, her long shuddering breath. Note ifs coming
he thought in a flashing instant. But she didn't even shake
him. She just held him, hard, not shaking him, as if her
hand too didn't know what it wanted to do next. Her face
was so near that he could feel her breath on his cheek. He
didn't need to look up to know what her face looked like
now. 'Tell!” she said. "Tell, then! You little nigger bastard!
You nigger bastard!”



110

That was the third day. On the fourth day she became
quite calmly and completely mad. She no longer planned
at all. Her subsequent actions followed a kind of divination,
as if the days and the unsleeping mghts during which she
had nursed be hin d that calm mask her fear and fury had
turned her psychic along with her natural female infallibil-
ity for the spontaneous comprehension of evil.

She was quite calm now. She had escaped for the mo-
ment from even urgency. It was as though now she had
time to look about and plan. Looking about the scene her
glance, her mind, her thought, went full and straight and
instantaneous to the janitor sitting in the door of the fur-
nace room. There was no ratiocination m it, no design. She
just seemed to look outside herself for one moment like a
passenger in a car, and saw without any surprise at all that
small, dirty man sitting in a sphnt chair in a soot grimed
doorway, reading through steelrimmed spectacles from a
book upon his knees — a figure, almost a fixture, of which
she had been aware for five years now without once having
actually looked at him. She would not have recognised his
face on the street. She would have passed him without
knowing him, even though he was a man. Her life now
seemed straight and simple as a corridor with him sitting at
the end of it. She went to him at once, already in motion
upon the dingy path before she was aware that she had
started.

He was sitting m his splmt chair in the doorway, the
open book upon his knees. When she approached she saw
that it was the Bible But she just noticed this, as she might
have noticed a fly upon his leg. “You hate him too/’ she
said. “You’ve been watching him too. Ive seen you. Dont
say you dont/" He looked up at her face, the spectacles
propped now above his brows. He was not an old man.
In his present occupation he was an incongruity. He was a
hard man, in his prime; a man who should have been living



Ill

a hard and active life, and whom time, circumstance, some-
thing, had betrayed, sweeping the hale body and thinking
of a man of fortyfive into a backwater suitable for a man
of sixty or sixtyfive. “You know,” she said. “You knew
before the other children started calling him nigger. Yon
came out here at the same time. You weren’t working here
a month before that Christmas night when Charley found
him on the doorstep yonder. Tell me.” The janitors face
was round, a little flabby, quite dirty, with a dirty stubble.
His eyes were quite clear, quite gray, quite cold. They were
quite mad too. But the woman did not notice that Or per-
haps they did not look mad to her. So they faced one an-
other in the coalgrimed doorway, mad eyes looking into
mad eyes, mad voice talking to mad voice as calm and
quiet and terse as two conspirators. “I've watched you for
five years.” She believed that she was telling the truth. “Sit-
ting here in this very chair, watching him. You never sit
here except when the children are outdoors. But as soon
as they come out, you bring this chair here to the door and
sit in it where you can watch them. Watching him and
hearing the other children calling him Nigger. That's what
you are doing. I know. You came here just to do that, to
watch him and hate him. You were here ready when he
came. Maybe you brought him and left him on the step
yonder yourself. But anyway you know. And I've got to
know. When he tells I will be fired. And Charley may —
will — Tell me. Tell me, now.”

“Ah,” the janitor said. “I knowed he would be there to
catch you when God's time came. I knowed. I know who
set him there, a sign and a damnation for bitchery.”

“Yes. He was right behind the curtain. As close as you
are. You tell me, now. I've seen your eyes when you look
at him. Watched you. For five years.”

“I know,” he said. “I know evil. Amt I made evil to get
up and walk God's world? A walking pollution in God's



112

own face I made it. Out of the mouths of little children He
never concealed it You have heard them. I never told them
to say it, to call him in his rightful nature, by the name of
his damnation. I never told them. They knowed. They was
told, but it wasn’t by me. I just waited, on His own good
time, when He would see fitten to reveal it to His living
world. And it s come now. This is the sign, wrote again in
womansinnmg and bitchery.”

“Yes. But what must I do? Tell me.”

“Wait. Like I waited. Five years I waited for the Lord
to move and show His will. And He done it You wait too.
When He is ready for it He will show His will to them that
have the sayso.”

“Yes. The say so.” They glared at one another, still, breath-
ing quietly.

“The madam. When He is ready. He will reveal it to her.”

“You mean, if the madam knows, she will send him away?
Yes. But I cant wait,”

“No more can you hurry the Lord God. Aint I waited five
years?”

She began to beat her hands lightly together. “But dont
you see? This may be the Lords way. For you to tell me.
Because you know. Maybe its His way for you to tell me
and me to tell the madam ” Her mad eyes were quite calm,
her mad voice patient and calm: it was only her light un-
ceasing hands.

“Youll wait, the same as I waited,” he said. “You have
felt the weight of the Lord's remorseful hand for maybe
three days. I have lived under it for five years, watching
and waiting for His own good time, because my sin is
greater than your sin.” Though he was looking directly at
her face he did not seem to see her at all, his eyes did
not. They looked like they were blind, wide open, icecold,
fanatical. “To what I done and what I suffered to expiate



113

it, what you done and are womansuffering aint no more
than a handful of rotten dirt. I done bore mine five years;
who are you to hurry Almighty God with your little
womanfilth?”

She turned, at once. “Well. You dont have to tell me.
I know, anyway. I’ve known it all the time that he’s part
nigger.” She returned to the house. She did not walk fast
now and she yawned, terrifically. ‘All I have to do is to thinV
of some way to make the madam believe it. He wont tell
her, back me up.’ She yawned again, tremendously, her face
emptied now of everything save yawning and then emptied
even of yawnmg She had just thought of something else.
She had not thought of it before, but she believed that she
had, had known it all the while, because it seemed so right:
he would not only be removed, he would be punished for
having given her terror and worry. ‘They’ll send him to the
nigger orphanage,’ she thought. ‘Of course. They will have
to.’

She did not even go to the matron at once. She had
started theie, but instead of turning toward the office door
she saw herself passmg it, going on toward the stairs and
mounting. It was as though -she followed herself to see
where she was going. In the corridor, quiet and empty now,
she yawned again, with utter relaxation. She entered her
room and locked the door and took off her clothes and got
into bed. The shades were drawn and she lay stall m the
more than halfdark, on her back. Her eyes were closed and
her face was empty and smooth After a while she began to
open her legs and close them slowly, feeling the sheets flow
cool and smooth over them and then flow warm and smooth
again. Thinking seemed to hang suspended between the
sleep which she had not had now in three nights and the
/sleep which she was about to receive, her body open to
/ accept sleep as though sleep were a man. ‘All I need do is



114

to make the madam believe/ she thought And then she
thought He will look just like a pea in a pan full of coffee
beans

That was in the afternoon. At nine that evening she was
undressing again when she heard the janitor come up the
corridor, toward her door. She did not, could not, know
who it was, then somehow she did know, hearing the
steady feet and then a knock at the door which already
began to open before she could spring to it. She didn’t call;
she sprang to the door, putting her weight against it, hold-
ing it to. Tm undressing!” she said in a thin, agonised voice,
knowing who it was. He didn’t answer, his weight firm and
steady against the crawling door, beyond the crawling gap.
“You cant come in here*” she cried, hardly louder than a
whisper. “Dont you know they . . Her voice was pant-
ing, fainting, and desperate. He did not answer. She tried
to halt and hold the slow inward crawling of the door. "Let
me get some clothes on, and 111 come out there. Will you
do that?” She spoke m that fainting whisper, her tone light,
inconsequential, like that of one speaking to an unpredict-
able child or a maniac: soothing, cajoling: "You wait, now.
Do you hear? Will you wait, now?” He did not answer. The
slow and irresistible crawling of the door did not cease.
Leaning agamst it, wearing nothing save her undergarment,
she was like a puppet in some burlesque of rapine and de-
spair. Leaning, downlooking, immobile, she appeared to be
In deepest thought, as if the puppet in the midst of the
scene had gone astray within itself. Then she turned, re-
leasing the door, and sprang back to the bed, whipping up
without looking at it a garment and whirling to face the
door, clutching the garment at her breast, huddling. He had
already entered; apparently he had been watching her and
waiting during the whole blind interval of fumbling and
interminable haste.



115

He still wore the overalls and he now wore his hat. He
did not remove it. Again his cold mad gray eyes did not
seem to see her, to look at her at all. “If the Lord Himself
come into the room of one of yon,” he said, “you would be-
lieve He come in bitchery.” He said, “Have you told her?*

The woman sat on the bed She seemed to smk slowly
back upon it, clutching the garment, watching him, her face
blanched. “Told her?*

“What will she do with him?*

“Do?* She watched him: those bright, still eyes that
seemed not to look at her so much as to envelop her. Her
mouth hung open like the mouth of an idiot.

“Where will they send him to?” She didn’t answer. “Dont
lie to me, to the Lord God. They’ll send him to the one for
niggers.* Her mouth closed; it was as if she had discovered
at last what he was talking about. “Ay, I’ve thought it out.
They’ll send him to the one for nigger children.” She didn’t
answer, but she was watching him now, her eyes still a lit-
tle fearful but secret too, calculating. Now he was looking
at her; his eyes seemed to contract upon her shape and be-
ing. “Answer me, Jezebel!” he shouted.

“Shhhhhhhhh!” she said. “Yes. They’ll have to. When they
find ...”

“Ah,” he said. His gaze faded; the eyes released her and
enveloped her again. Looking at them, she seemed to see
herself as less than nothing in them, trivial as a twig float-
ing upon a pool. Then his eyes became almost human. He
began to look about the womanroom as if he had never
seen one before: the close room, warm, littered, woman-
pinksmelling. “Womanfilth,” he said. “Before the face of
God.” He turned and went out. After a while the woman
rose. She stood for a time, clutching the garment, motion-
less, idiotic, staring at the empty door as if she could not
think what to tell herself to do. Then she ran. She sprang



116

to the door, flinging herself upon it, crashing it to and lock-
ing it, leaning against it, panting, clutching the turned key
in both hands.

At breakfast time the next morning the janitor and the
child were missing. No trace of them could be found. The
police were notified at once. A side door was found to be
unlocked, to which the janitor had a key.

“It’s because he knows/’ the dietitian told the matron.

“Knows what?”

“That that child, that Christmas boy, is a nigger.”

“A what?” the matron said. Backthrust in her chair, she
glared at the younger woman. “A ne — I dont believe itl”
she cned. “I dont believe it!”

“You dont have to believe it,” the other said. “But he
knows it. He stole him away because of it”

The matron was past fifty, flabby faced, with weak, kind,
frustrated eyes. “I dont believe it!” she said. But on the
third day she sent for the dietitian. She looked as if she had
not slept in some time. The dietitian, on the contrary, was
quite fresh, quite serene. She was still unshaken when the
matron told her the news, that the man and the child had
been found. “At Little Bock,” the matron said. “He tried to
put the child into an orphanage there. They thought he
Was crazy and held him until the police came.” She looked
at the younger woman. “You told me . . . The other day
you said . . . How did you know about this?”

The dietitian did not look away. “I didn’t. I had no idea
at all. Of course I knew it didn’t mean anything when the
other children called him Nigger — ”

“Nigger?” the matron said. “The other children?”

"“They have been calling him Nigger for years. Sometimes
I think that children have a way of knowing things that
grown people of your and my age dont see. Children, and
old people like hiirn, like that old man. That’s why he al-



117

ways sat in the door yonder while they were playing in the
yard: watching that child. Maybe he found it out from
hearing the other children call him Nigger. But he might
have known beforehand. If you remember, they came here
about the same time. He hadn't been working here hardly
a month before the night— that Christmas, dont you re-
member — when Ch — they found the baby on the door-
step?” She spoke smoothly, watching the baffled, shrinking
eyes of the older woman full upon her own as though she
could not remove them. The dietitian's eyes were bland
and innocent. “And so the other day we were talking and
he was trying to tell me something about the child. It was
something he wanted to tell me, tell somebody, and finally
he lost his nerve maybe and wouldn't tell it, and so I left
him. I wasn't thinking about it at all. It had gone com-
pletely out of my mind when — •" Her voice ceased. She
gazed at the matron while into her face there came an ex-
pression of enlightenment, sudden comprehension; none
could have said if it were simulated or not. “Why, that's
why it . . . Why, I see it all, now. What happened just the
day before they were gone, missing. I was in the corridor,
going to my room; it was the same day I happened to be
talking to him and he refused to tell me whatever it was
he started to tell, when all of a sudden he came up and
stopped me, I thought then it was funny because I had
never before seen him inside the house. And he said — he
sounded crazy, he looked crazy. I was scared, too scared to
move, with him blocking the corridor — he said, ‘Have you
told her yet?' and I said, ‘Told who? Told who what?' and
then I realised he meant you; if I had told you that he
had tried to tell me something about the child. But I didn't
know what he meant for me to tell you and I wanted to
scream and then he said, ‘What will she do if she finds it
out?' and I didn't know what to say or how to get away
from him and then he said, ‘You dont have to tell me, J



118

know what she will do. She will send him to the one foi
niggers/ ”

‘Tor Negroes?”

“I dont see how we failed to see it as long as we did. You
can look at his face now, his eyes and hair. Of course it's
terrible. But thats where he will have to go, I suppose.”

Behind her glasses the weak, troubled eyes of the matron
had a harried, jellied look, as if she were trying to force
them to something beyond their physical cohesiveness. “But
why did he want to take the child away?”

“Well, if you want to know what I think, I think he is
crazy. If you could have seen him in the corridor that ni —
day like I did. Of course it’s bad for the child to have to go
to the nigger home, after this, after growing up with white
people. Its not his fault what he is. But its not our
fault, either — ” She ceased, watching the matron. Behind
the glasses the older woman’s eyes were still harried, weak,
hopeless; her mouth was trembling as she shaped speech
with it. Her words were hopeless too, but they were deci-
sive enough, determined enough.

“We must place him. We must place him at once. What
applications have we? If you will hand me the file . . ”
When the child wakened, he was being carried. It was
pitchdark and cold; he was being carried downstairs by
someone who moved with silent and infinite care. Pressed
between him and one of the arms which supported him
was a wad which he knew to be his clothes. He made no
outcry, no sound. He knew where he was by the smell, the
air, of the back stairway which led down to the side door
from the room in which his bed had been one among forty
others since he could remember. He knew also by smell
that the person who carried him was a man. But he made
no sound, lying as still and as lax as while he had been
tsleep, riding high in the invisible arms, moving, descend-



119

jng slowly toward the side door which gave onto the play*
ground.

He didn't know who was carrying him. He didn't bothei
about it because he believed that he knew where he was
going. Or why, that is. He didn't bother about where either,
yet. It went back two years, to when he was three years
old. One day there was missing from among them a girl of
twelve named Alice. He had liked her, enough to let her
mother him a little; perhaps because of it. And so to him
she was as mature, almost as large in size, as the adult
women who ordered his eating and washing and sleeping,
with the difference that she was not and never would be
his enemy. One night she waked him. She was telling him
goodbye but he did not know it. He was sleepy and a little
annoyed, never full awake, suffering her because she had
always tried to be good to him. He didn't know that she
was crying because he did not know that grown people
cried, and by the time he learned that, memory had forgot-
ten her. He went back into sleep while still suffering her,
and the next morning she was gone. Vanished, no trace of
her left, not even a garment, the very bed in which she had
slept already occupied by a new boy. He never did know
where sbe went to. That day be listened while a few of
the older girls who had helped her prepare to leave in that
same hushed, secret sibilance in which a half dozen young
girls help prepare the seventh one for marriage told, still
batebreathed, about the new dress, the new shoes, the car-
riage which had fetched her away. He knew then that she
had gone for good, had passed beyond the iron gates in
tbe steel fence. He seemed to see her then, grown heroic at
the instant of vanishment beyond the clashedto gates, fad-
ing without diminution of size into some thin g nameless and
splendid, like a sunset. It was more than a year before he
knew that she had not been the first and would not be the



120

last That there had been more than Alice to vanish be-
yond the clashedto gates, in a new dress or new overalls,
with a small neat bundle less large sometimes than a shoe-
box, He believed that that was what was happening to him
now. He believed that he knew now how they had all man-
aged to depart without leaving any trace behind them. He
believed that they had been carried out, as he was being, in
the dead of night.

Now he could feel the door. It was quite near now; he
knew to the exact number how many more invisible steps
remained to which in turn the man who carried him would
lower himself with that infinite and silent care. Against his
cheek he could feel the mans quiet, fast, warm breathing;
beneath him he could feel the tense and rigid arms, the
wadded lump which he knew was his clothing caught up
by feel in the dark. The man stopped. As he stooped the
child s feet swung down and touched the floor, his toes
curling away from the ironcold planks. The man spoke, for
the first time. "Stand up,” he said. Then the child knew who
he was.

He recognised the man at once, without surprise. The
surprise would have been the matron’s if she had known
how well he did know the man. He did not know the man’s
name and in the three years since he had been a sentient
creature they had not spoken a hundred words. But the
man was a more definite person than anyone else in his life,
not excepting the girl Alice. Even at three years of age the
child knew that there was something between them that
did not need to be spoken. He knew that he was never on
the playground for an instant that the man was not watch-
ing him from the chair in the furnace room door, and that
the man was watching him with a profound and unflagging
attention. If the child had been older he would perhaps
have thought He hates me and fears me. So much so that
he cannot let me out of his sight With more vocabulary but



121

no more age he might have thought That is why I am dif-
ferent from the others . because he is watching me all the
time He accepted it. So he was not surprised when he
found who it was who had taken him, sleeping, from his
bed and carried him downstairs; as, standing beside the
door in the cold pitch dark while the man helped him put
on his clothes, he might have thought He hates me enough
even to try to 'prevent something that is about to happen to
me coming to pass

He dressed obediently, shivering, as swiftly as he could,
the two of them fumbling at the small garments, getting
them on him somehow “Your shoes,” the man said, in that
dying whisper. “Here.” The child sat on the cold floor, put-
ting on the shoes. The man was not touching him now, but
the child could hear, feel, that the man was stooped too,
engaged in something. "He’s putting on his shoes too,’ he
thought. The man touched him again, groping, lifting him
to his feet. His shoes were not laced. He had not learned
to do that by himself yet He did not tell the man that he
had not laced them. He made no sound at all. He just stood
there and then a bigger garment enveloped him completely
— by its smell he knew that it belonged to the man — and
then he was lifted again. The door opened, inyawned. The
fresh cold air rushed in, and light from the lamps along the
street, he could see the lights and the blank factory walls
and the tall unsmokmg chimneys against the stars. Against
the street light the steel fence was like a parade of starved
soldiers. As they crossed the empty playground his dan-
gling feet swung rhythmically to the man’s striding, the
unlaced shoes flapping about his ankles. They reached the
iron gates and passed through.

They did not have to wait long for the streetcar. If he
had been older he would have remarked how well the man
had timed himself. But he didn’t wonder or notice. He just
stood on the comer beside the man, in the unlaced shoes,



122

enveloped to the heels in the man's coat, his eyes round
and wide, his small face still, awake. The car came up, the
row of windows, jarrmg to a stop and humming while they
entered. It was almost empty, since the hour was past two
o'clock. Now the man noticed the unlaced shoes and laced
them, the child watching, quite still on the seat, his legs
thrust straight out before him. The station was a long dis-
tance away, and he had ridden on a streetcar before, so
when they reached the station he was asleep. When he
waked it was daylight and they had been on the train for
some time. He had never ridden on a train before, but no
one could have told it. He sat quite still, as in the streetcar,
completely enveloped m the mans coat save for his out-
thrust legs and his head, watching the country — hills and
trees and cows and such — that he had never seen before
flowing past When the man saw that he was awake he
produced food from a piece of newspaper. It was bread,
with ham between. “Here,” the man said. He took the food
and ate, looking out the window.

He said no word, he had shown no surprise, not even
when on the third day the policemen came and got him
and the man. The place where they now were was no dif-
ferent from the one which they had left in the night — the
same children, with different names; the same grown peo-
ple, with different smells: he could see no more reason why
he should not have stayed there than why he should ever
have left the first one. But he was not surprised when they
came and told him again to get up and dress, neglecting to
tell him why or where he was going now. Perhaps he knew
that he was going back; perhaps with his child's clairvoy-
ance he had known all the while what the man had not:
that it would not, could not, last. On the train again he saw
the same hills, the same trees, the same cows, but from an-
other side, another direction. The policeman gave him food.
It was bread, with ham between, though it did not come



123

out of a scrap of newspaper. He noticed that, but be said
nothing, perhaps thought nothing.

Then he was home again. Perhaps he expected to be pun-
ished upon his return, for what, what crime exactly, he
did not expect to know, since he had already learned that,
though children can accept adults as adults, adults can
never accept children as anything but adults too. He had
already forgot the toothpaste affair. He was now avoiding
the dietitian just as, a month ago, he had been putting him-
self in her way. He was so busy avoiding her that he had
long since forgot the reason for it, soon he had forgotten
the trip too, since he was never to know that there was any
connection between them. Now and then he thought of it,
hazily and vaguely. But that was only when he would look
toward the door to the furnace room and remember the
man who used to sit there and watch him and who was
now gone, completely, without leaving any trace, not even
the splint chair in the doorway, after the fashion of all who
departed from there. Where he may have gone to also the
child did not even think or even wonder.

One evening they came to the schoolroom and got him.
It was two weeks before Christmas. Two of the young
women — the dietitian was not one — took him to the bath-
room and washed him and combed his damp hair and
dressed him in clean overalls and fetched him to the ma-
tron’s office. In the office sat a man, a stranger. And he
looked at the man and he knew before the matron even
spoke Perhaps memory knowing, knowing beginning to
remember, perhaps even desire, since five is still too young
to have learned enough despair to hope Perhaps he re-
membered suddenly the tram ride and the food, since even
memory did not go much further back than that. "Joseph,”
the matron said, 'how would you like to go and live with
some nice people in the country?”

He stood there, his ears and face red and burning with



124

harsh soap and harsh towelling, m the stiff new overalls,
listening to the stranger. He had looked once and saw a
thickish man with a close brown beard and hair cut close
though not recently. Hair and beard both had a hard, vig-
orous quality, unsilvered, as though the pigmentation were
impervious to the forty and more years which the face
revealed. The eyes were kghtcolored, cold He wore a suit
of hard, decent black. On his knee rested a black hat held
in a blunt clean hand shut, even on the soft felt of the hat,
into a fist Across his vest ran a heavy silver watch chain.
His tlnck black shoes were planted side by side, they had
been polished by hand. Even the child of five years, look-
ing at him, knew that he did not use tobacco himself and
would not tolerate it m others. But he did not look at the
man because of his eyes.

He could feel the man looking at him though, with a
stare cold and intent and yet not deliberately harsh. It was
the same stare with which he might have examined a horse
or a second-hand plow, convinced beforehand that he
would see flaws, convinced beforehand that he would buy.
His voice was deliberate, infrequent, ponderous; the voice
of a man who demanded that he be listened to not so much
with attention but in silence. “And you either cannot or
will not tell me anything more about his parentage.”

The matron did not look at him. Behind her glasses her
eyes apparently had jellied, for the time at least She said
immediately, almost a little too immediately: “We make
no effort to ascertain their parentage. As I told you before,
he was left on the doorstep here on Christmas eve; it will
be five years this two weeks. If the child's parentage is im-
portant to you, you had better not adopt one at all”

*T would not mean just that,” the stranger said. His tone
now was a little placative. He contrived at once to apolo-
gise without surrendering one jot of his conviction. “I would
have thought to talk with Miss Atkins (this was the died-



125

tian’s name) since it was with her I have been in corre-
spondence.”

Again the matron’s voice was cold and immediate, speak-
ing almost before his had ceased: “I can perhaps give you
as much information about this or any other of our chil-
dren as Miss Atkins can, since her official connection here
is only with the diningroom and kitchen. It just happened
that in this case she was kind enough to act as secretary in
our correspondence with you.”

"It’s no matter,” the stranger said. "It’s no matter. I had
just thought . .

"Just thought what? We force no one to take our chil-
dren, nor do we force the children to go against their
wishes, if their reasons are sound ones. That is a matter
for the two parties to settle between themselves. We only
advise.”

"Ay ” the stranger said. "It’s no matter, as I just said to
you. I’ve no doubt the tyke will do. He will find a good
home with Mrs. McEaehern and me. We are not young
now, and we like quiet ways. And hell find no fancy food
and no idleness. Nor neither more work than will be good
for him. I make no doubt that with us he will grow up to
fear God and abhor idleness and vanity despite his origin.”

Thus the promissory note which he had signed with a
tube of toothpaste on that afternoon two months ago was
recalled, the yet oblivious executor of it sitting wrapped in
a clean horse blanket, small, shapeless, immobile, on the
seat of a light buggy jolting through the December twi-
light up a frozen and rutted lane. They had driven all that
day. At noon the man had fed him, taking from beneath
the seat a cardboard box containing country food cooked
three days ago. But only now did the man speak to him.
He spoke a single word, pointing up the lane with a mit-
tened fist which clutched the whip, toward a single light
which shone in the dusk. "Home,” he said. The child said



126

nothing. The man looked down at him. The man was bun-
dled too against the cold, squat, big, shapeless, somehow
rocklike, indomitable, not so much ungentle as ruthless,
"1 said, there is your home.” Still, the child didn’t answer.
He had never seen a home, so there was nothing for him
to say about it And he was not old enough to talk and say
nothing at the same time. “You will find food and shelter
and the care of Christian people,” the man said. “And the
work within your strength that will keep you out of mis-
chief. For I will have you learn soon that the two abomina-
tions are sloth and idle thinking, the two virtues are work
and the fear of God.” Still the child said nothing He had
neither ever worked nor feared God. He knew less about
God than about work. He had seen work going on in the
person of men with rakes and shovels about the playground
six days each week, but God had only occurred on Sunday.
And then — save for the concomitant ordeal of cleanliness —
it was music that pleased the ear and words that did not
trouble the ear at all — on the whole, pleasant, even if a
little tiresome. He said nothing at all. The buggy jolted on,
the stout, wellkept team eagering, homing, barning.

There was one other thing which he was not to remem-
ber until later, when memory no longer accepted his face,
accepted the surface of remembering. They were in the
matron’s office; he standing motionless, not looking at the
strangers eyes which he could feel upon him, waiting for
the stranger to say what his eyes were thinking. Then
it came; “Christmas. A heathenish name. Sacrilege. I will
change that.”

“That will be your legal right,” the matron said, “We are
not interested in what they are called, but in how they are
treated.”

But the stranger was not listening to anyone any more
than he was talking to anyone. “From now on his name will
be McEachem.”



127

"That will be suitable ” the matron said. "To give him
your name.”

"He will eat my bread and he will observe my religion/*
the stranger said. "Why should he not bear my name?”

The child was not listening. He was not bothered. He
did not especially care, any more than if the man had said
the day was hot when it was not hot. He didn’t even bother
to say to himself My name aint McEachern. My name is
Christmas There was no need to bother about that yet
There was plenty of time.

"Why not, indeed?” the matron said.



7


AND MEMORY KNOWS THIS; TWENTY YEARS LATER MEMORY

is still to believe On this day I became a man

The clean, spartan room was redolent of Sunday. In the
windows the clean, darned curtains stirred faintly in a
breeze smelling of turned earth and crabapple. Upon the
yellow imitation oak melodeon with its pedals padded with
pieces of frayed and outworn carpet sat a fruit jar Med with
larkspur. The boy sat in a straight chair beside the table
on which was a nickel lamp and an enormous Bible with
brass clasps and hinges and a brass lock. He wore a clean
white shirt without a collar. His trousers were dark, harsh,
and new. His shoes had been polished recently and clum-
sily, as a boy of eight would polish them, with small dull
patches here and there, particularly about the heels, where
the polish had failed to overlap. Upon the table, facing him
and open, lay a Presbyterian catechism.

McEachem stood beside the table. He wore a clean,
glazed shirt, and the same black trousers in which the boy
had first seen him. His hair, damp, still unsilvered, was
combed clean and stiff upon his round skull. His beard was
also combed, also still damp. "You have not tried to learn
it/' he said.

128



129

The boy did not look np. He did not move. But the face
of the man was not more rocklike. "I did try.”

"Then try again. Ill give you another hour.” From his
pocket McEaehern took a thick silver watch and laid it face-
up on the table and drew up a second straight, hard chair
to the table and sat down, his clean, scrubbed hands on his
knees, his heavy polished shoes set squarely. On them were
no patches where the polish had failed to overlap. There
had been last night at suppertime, though And later the
boy, undressed for bed and in his shirt, had received a
whipping and then polished them agam. The boy sat at
the table. His face was bent, still, expressionless. Into the
bleak, clean room the springfilled air blew in fainting gusts.

That was at nine o’clock. They had been there since eight.
There were churches nearby, but the Presbyterian church
was five miles away, it would take an hour to drive it. At
half past nme Mrs McEaehern came in. She was dressed,
in black, with a bonnet — a small woman, entering timidly,
a little hunched, with a beaten face. She looked fifteen
years older than the rugged and vigorous husband. She
did not quite enter the room. She just came within the
door and stood there for a moment, in her bonnet and her
dress of rusty yet often brushed black, carrying an um-
brella and a palm leaf fan, with something queer about hei
eyes, as if whatever she saw or heard, she saw or heard
through a more immediate manshape or manvoice, as if she
were the medium and the vigorous and ruthless husband
the control He may have heard her But he neither looked
up nor spoke. She turned and went away.

Exactly on the dot of the hour McEaehern raised his
head, “Do you know it now?” he said.

The boy did not move. “No,” he said.

McEaehern rose, dehberately, without haste. He took up
the watch and closed it and returned it to his pocket, loop-
ing the chain again through his suspender. "Come,” he



ISO

said. He did not look back. The boy followed, down the
hall, toward the rear; he too walked erect and in silence,
his head up. There was a very kinship of stubbornness like
a transmitted resemblance in their backs. Mrs McEachem
was in the kitchen. She still wore the hat, still carried the
umbrella and the fan. She was watching the door when
they passed it. "Pa,” she said. Neither of them so much as
looked at her. They might not have heard, she might not
have spoken, at all. They went on, in steady single file, the
two backs in their rigid abnegation of all compromise more
alike than actual blood could have made them. They
crossed the back yard and went on toward the stable and
entered. McEachern opened the crib dooi and stood aside.
The boy entered the crib. McEachem took from the wall
a harness strap. It was neither new nor old, like his shoes.
It was clean, like the shoes, and it smelled like the man
smelled: an odor of clean hard virile living leather. He
looked down at the boy.

"Where is the book?” he said. The boy stood before him,
still, his face calm and a little pale beneath the smooth
parchment skin. "You did not bring it,” McEachem said.
’‘Go back and get it.” His voice was not unkind. It was not
human, personal, at all. It was fust cold, implacable, like
written or printed words. The boy turned and went out

When he reached the house Mrs McEachem was in the
hall. "Joe,” she said. He did not answer. He didn’t even
look at her, at her face, at the stiff movement of one half
lifted hand in stiff caricature of the softest movement which
human hand can make. He walked stiffly past her, rigid-
faced, his face rigid with pride perhaps and despair. Or
maybe it was vanity, the stupid vanity of a man. He got
the catechism from the table and returned to the stable.

McEachem was waiting, holding the strap. "Put it
down,” he said. The boy laid the book on the floor, "Not
there,” McEachem said, without heat "You would believe



131

that a stable floor, the stamping place o£ beasts, is the
proper place for the word of God. But HI learn you that,
too/" He took up the book himself and laid it on a ledge.
‘Take down your pants/" he said. “Well not soil them.*

Then the boy stood, his trousers collapsed about his feet,
his legs revealed beneath his brief shirt. He stood, slight
and erect When the strap fell he did not flinch, no quiver
passed over his face. He was looking straight ahead, with a
rapt, calm expression like a monk in a picture. McEachem
began to strike methodically, with slow and deliberate force,
still without heat or anger. It would have been hard to
say which face was the more rapt, more calm, more con-
vinced.

He struck ten times, then he stopped. “Take the book/*
he said. “Leave your pants be” He handed the boy the
catechism. The boy took it. He stood so, erect, his face and
the pamphlet lifted, his attitude cne of exaltation. Save for
surplice he might have been a Catholic choir hoy, with for
nave the looming and shadowy crib, the rough planked
wall beyond which in the ammoniac and dryscented ob-
scurity beasts stirred now and then with snorts and indo-
lent thuds. McEachem lowered himself stiffly to the top of
a feed box, spreadkneed, one hand on his knee and the
silver watch in the other palm, his clean, bearded face as
firm as carved stone, his eyes ruthless, cold, but not un-
kind.

They remained so for another hour. Before it was up Mrs
McEachem came to the back door of the house. But she did
not speak. She just stood there, looking at the stable, in the
hat, with the umbrella and the fan. Then she went bad
into the house.

Again on the exact second of the hour McEachem re*
turned the watch to his pocket. “Do you know it now?*
he said. The boy didn’t answer, rigid, erect, holding tins
open pamphlet before his face. McEachem took the book



132

from between his hands. Otherwise, the boy did not move
at all. “Repeat your catechism,” McEachern said. The boy
stared straight at the wall before him. His face was now
quite white despite the smooth rich pallor of his skin.
Carefully and deliberately McEachern laid the book upon
the ledge and took up the strap. He struck ten times. When
he fin is hed, the boy stood for a moment longer motionless.
He had had no breakfast yet; neither of them had eaten
breakfast yet Then the boy staggered and would have
fallen if the man had not caught his arm, holding him up.
“Come,” McEachern said, trying to lead him to the feed
box. “Sit down here.”

“No,” the boy said. His arm began to jerk in the mans
grasp. McEachern released him.

“Are you all right? Are you sick?”

“No,” the boy said. His voice was faint, his face was
quite white.

“Take the book,” McEachern said, putting it into the
boy’s hand. Through the crib window Mrs McEachern
came into view, emerging from the house. She now wore a
faded Mother Hubbard and a sunbonnet, and she carried
a cedar bucket She crossed the window without looking
toward the crib, and vanished. After a time the slow creak
of a well pulley reached them, coming with a peaceful,
startling quality upon the Sabbath air. Then she appeared
again in the window, her body balanced now to the bucket’s
weight in her hand, and re-entered the house without look-
ing toward the stable.

Again on the dot of the hour McEachern looked up from
the watch. “Have you learned it?” he said. The boy did not
answer, did not move. When McEachern approached he
saw that the boy was not looking at the page at all, that his
eyes were quite fixed and quite blank. When he put his
hand on the book he found that the boy was clinging to it
as if it were a rope or a post. When McEachern took the



133

book forcibly from his hands, the boy fell at fu\{ length to
the floor and did not move again.

When he came to it was late afternoon. He was in his
own bed in the attic room with its lowpitched roof. The
room was quiet, already filling with twilight. He felt quite
well, and he lay for some time, looking peacefully up at
the slanted ceiling overhead, before he became aware that
there was someone sitting beside the bed. It was McEach-
em. He now wore his everyday clothes also — not the over-
alls in which he went to the field, hut a faded clean shirt
without a collar, and faded, clean khaki trousers. “You are
awake/' he said His hand came forth and turned back the
cover. “Come,” he said.

The boy did not move. “Are you going to whip me
again?”

“Come,” McEachem said. “Get up.” The boy rose from
the bed and stood, thin, in clumsy cotton underclothes,
McEachem was moving also, thickly, with clumsy, muscle-
bound movements, as if at the expenditure of tremendous
effort; the boy, watching with the amazeless interest of a
child, saw the man kneel slowly and heavily beside the
bed. “Kneel down,” McEachem said. The boy knelt; the
two of them knelt in the close, twilit room: the small figure
in cutdown underwear, the ruthless man who had never
known either pity or doubt. McEachem began to pray.
He prayed for a long time, his voice droning, soporific, mo-
notonous. He asked that he be forgiven for trespass against
the Sabbath and for lifting his hand against a child, an or-
phan, who was dear to God. He asked that the child's stub-
born heart be softened and that the sin of disobedience be
forgiven him also, through the advocacy of the man whom
he had flouted and disobeyed, requesting that Almighty
be as magnanimous as himself, and by and through and
because of conscious grace.

He finished and rose, heaving to his feet. The boy still



134

knelt. He did not move at all. But his eyes were open (his
face had never been hidden or even lowered) and his face
was quite calm, calm, peaceful, quite inscrutable He heard
the man fumble at the table on which the lamp sat. A match
scraped, spurted, the flame steadied upon the wick, be-
neath the globe upon which the man’s hand appeared now
as if it had been dipped in blood. The shadows whirled and
steadied. McEachern lifted something from the table be-
side the lamp, the catechism He looked down at the boy
a nose, a cheek jutting, granitelike, bearded to the cavemed
and spectacled eyesocket. “Take the book,” he said.

It had begun that Sunday morning before breakfast. He
had had no breakfast, likely neither he nor the man had
once thought of that. The man himself had eaten no
breakfast, though he had gone to the table and demanded
absolution for the food and for the necessity of eating it.
At the noon meal he had been asleep, from nervous ex-
haustion. And at supper time neither of them had thought
of food. The boy did not even know what was wrong with
him, why he felt weak and peaceful.

That was how he felt as he lay in bed. The lamp was'
still burning, it was now full dark outside. Some time had
elapsed, hut it seemed to him that if he turned his head
he would still see the two of them, himself and the man,
kneeling beside the bed, or anyway, in the rug the in-
dentations of the twin pairs of knees without tangible
mbstance. Even the air seemed still to excrete that monot-
onous voice as of someone talking in a dream, talking, ad-
juring, arguing with a Piesence who could not even make
a phantom indentation in an actual rug.

He was lying so, on his back, his hands crossed on his
breast like a tomb effigy, when he heard again feet on the
cramped stairs. They were not the man's, he had heard
McEachern drive away in the buggy, departing in the twi-



135

light to drive three miles and to a church which was not
Presbyterian, to serve the expiation which he had set him-
self for the morning.

Without turning his head the boy heard Mrs McEaehera
toil slowly up the stairs. He heard her approach across the
floor. He did not look, though after a time her shadow came
and fell upon the wall where he could see it, and he saw
that she was carrying something. It was a tray of food.
She set the tray on the bed. He had not once looked at her.
He had not moved. “Joe,” she said. He didn't move. “Joe/*
she said. She could see that his eyes were open. She did
not touch him.

“I amt hungry,” he said.

She didn't move. She stood, her hands folded into her
apron. She didn't seem to be looking at him, either. She
seemed to be speaking to the wall beyond the bed. “I know
what you think. It aint that. He never told me to bring it
to you. It was me that thought to do it. He dont know. It
aint any food he sent you.” He didn't move. His face was
calm as a graven face, looking up at the steep pitch of the
plank ceiling. “You haven't eaten today. Sit up and eat.
It wasn't him that told me to bring it to you. He dont
know it. I waited until he was gone and then I fixed it my-
self”

He sat up then. While she watched him he rose from
the bed and took the tray and carried it to the comer and
turned it upside down, dumping the dishes and food and
all onto the floor. Then he returned to the bed, carrying
the empty tray as though it were a monstrance and he the
bearer, his surplice the cutdown undergarment which had
been bought for a man to wear She was not watching him
now, though she had not moved. Her hands were still
rolled into her apron. He got back into bed and lay again
on his back, his eyes wide and still upon the ceiling. He
could see her motionless shadow, shapeless, a little hunched.



136

then it went away. He did not look, but he could hear her
kneel in the comer, gathering the broken dishes back into
the tray. Then she left the room. It was quite still then.
The lamp burned steadily above the steady wick; on the
Wall the flitting shadows of whirling moths were as large
as birds. From beyond the window he could smell, feel,
darkness, spring, the earth.

He was just eight then. It was years later that memory
knew what he was remembering, years after that mght
when, an hour later, he rose from the bed and went and
knelt in the comer as he had not knelt on the rug, and
above the outraged food kneeling, with his hands ate, like
a savage, like a dog.

It was dusk; already he should have been miles toward
home. Although his Saturday afternoons were free, he had
never before been this far from home this late. When he
reached home he would be whipped. But not for what he
might have or might not have done during his absence.
When he reached home he would receive the same whip-
ping though he had committed no sin as he would receive
if McEachem had seen him commit it.

But perhaps he did not yet know himself that he was not
going to commit the sm. The five of them were gathered
quietly in the dusk about the sagging doorway of a de-
serted sawmill shed where, waiting hidden a hundred yards
away, they had watched the Negro girl enter and look
back once and then vanish. One of the older boys had ar-
ranged it and he went in first. The others, boys in identical
overalls, who lived within a three mile radius, who, like
the one whom they knew as Joe McEachem, could at
fourteen and fifteen plow and milk and chop wood like
grown men, drew straws for turns. Perhaps he did not even
think of it as a sin until he thought of the man who would
be waiting for him at home, since to fourteen the para-



137

mount sin would be to be publicly convicted of virginity,

His turn came. He entered the shed. It was dark. At once
he was overcome by a terrible haste. There was something
in him trying to get out, like when he had used to think
of toothpaste. But he could not move at once, standing
there, smelling the woman, smelling the Negro all at once,
enclosed by the womanshenegro and the haste, driven, hav-
ing to wait until she spoke: a guiding sound that was no
particular word and completely unaware. Then it seemed
to him that he could see her — something, prone, abject; her
eyes perhaps. Leaning, he seemed to look down into a
black well and at the bottom saw two glints like reflection
of dead stars. He was moving, because his foot touched her.
Then it touched her again because he kicked her. He
kicked her hard, kicking mto and through a choked wail of
surprise and fear. She began to scream, he jerking her up,
clutching her by the arm, hitting at her with wide, wild
blows, striking at the voice perhaps, feeling her flesh any-
way, enclosed by the womanshenegro and the haste.

Then she fled beneath his fist, and he too fled backward
as the others fell upon him, swarming, grappling, fumbling,
he striking back, his breath hissing with rage and despair.
Then it was male he smelled, they smelled; somewhere be-
neath it the She scuttling, screaming. They trampled and
swayed, striking at whatever hand or body touched, until
they all went down m a mass, he underneath. Yet he still
struggled, fighting, weeping. There was no She at all now.
They just fought; it was as if a wind had blown among
them, hard and clean. They held him down now, holding
him helpless. ‘"Will you quit now? We got you. Promise
to quit now”

“No,” he said. He heaved, twisting

“Quit, Joe! You cant fight all of us. Dont nobody want
to fight you, anyway.”

“No ” he said, panting, struggling. None of them could



138

nee, tell who was who. They had completely forgot about
die girl, why they had fought, if they had ever known.
On the part of the other four it had been purely automatic
and reflex: that spontaneous compulsion of the male to
fight with or because of or over the partner with which he
has recently or is about to copulate. But none of them
knew why he had fought And he could not have told
them. They held him to the earth, talking to one another
in quiet, strained voices.

“Some of you all back there get away. Then the rest of
us will turn him loose at the same time.”

"Whos got him? Who is this I’ve got?”

“Here; turn loose. Now wait: here he is. Me and — ”
Agam the mass of them surged, struggled. They held him
again. “We got him here. You all turn loose and get out
Give us room.”

Two of them rose and backed away, into the door. Then
die other two seemed to explode upward out of the earth,
the duskfilled shed, already running Joe struck at them
as soom as he was free, hut they were already clear. Lying
on his hack he watched the four of them run on in the
dusk, slowing, turning to look back. He rose and emerged
from the shed. He stood m the door, brushing himself off,
this too purely automatic, while a short distance away they
huddled quietly and looked back at him. He did not look at
them. He went on, his overalls duskcolored in the dusk. It
was late now. The evening star was rich and heavy as a
jasmine bloom. He did not look back once. He went on,
fading, phantomlike; the four boys who watched him
huddled quietly, their faces small and pale with dusk.
From the group a voice spoke suddenly, loud: “Yaaah!”
He did not look back. A second voice said quietly, carrying
quietly, clear; “See you tomorrow at church, Joe ” He
didn’t answer. He went on Now and then he brushed at
his overalls, mechanically, with his hands.



139

When he came in sight of home all light had departed
from the west. In the pasture behind the bam there was a
spring: a clump of willows in the darkness smelt and
heard but not seen. When he approached the fluting of
young frogs ceased like so many strings cut with simul-
taneous scissors. He knelt, it was too dark to discern even
his silhouetted head. He bathed his face, his swollen eye.
He went on, crossing the pasture toward the kitchen light
It seemed to watch him, biding and threatful, like an eye.

When he reached the lot fence he stopped, looking at the
light in the kitchen window. He stood there for a while,
leaning on the fence. The grass was aloud, alive with crick-
ets. Against the dewgray earth and the dark bands of trees
fireflies drifted and faded, erratic and random. A mocking-
bird sang in a tree beside the house. Behind him, in the
woods beyond the spring, two whippoorwills whistled. Be-
yond them, as though beyond some ultimate horizon of sum-
mer, a hound howled. Then he crossed the fence and saw
someone sitting quite motionless in the door to the stable
in which waited the two cows which he had not yet milked.

He seemed to recognise McEachem without surprise, as
if the whole situation were perfectly logical and reasonable
and inescapable. Perhaps he was thinking then how he and
the man could always count upon one another, depend
upon one another, that it was the woman alone who was
unpredictable. Perhaps he saw no incongruity at all in the
fact that he was about to be punished, who had refrained
from what McEachem would consider the cardinal sin
which he could commit, exactly the same as if he had com-
mitted it. McEachem did not rise. He still sat, stolid and
rocklike, his shirt a white blur in the doors black yawn.
"I have milked and fed/' he said. Then he rose, deliber-
ately. Perhaps the boy knew that he already held the strap
in his hand It rose and fell, deliberate, numbered, with de-
liberate, flat reports. The boy’s body might have been wood



140

or stone; a post or a tower upon which the sentient part
of him mused like a hermit, contemplative and remote with
ecstasy and selfcrucifixion.

As they approached the kitchen they walked side by side.
When the light from the window fell upon them the man
stopped and tamed, leaning, peering, "Fighting/" he said.
"What was it about?”

The boy did not answer. His face was quite still, com-
posed. After a while he answered. His voice was quiet,
cold. "Nothing ”

They stood there. "You mean, you cant tell or you wont
tell?” The boy did not answer. He was not looking down.
He was not looking at anything. "Then, if you dont know
you are a fool. And if you wont tell you have been a knave.
Have you been to a woman?”

"No,” the boy said. The man looked at him. When he
spoke his tone was musing.

"You have never lied to me. That I know of, that is.”
He looked at the boy, at the still profile. "Who were you
fighting with?”

"There was more than one.”

"Ah,” the man said. "You left marks on them, I trust?”
"I dont know. I reckon so.”

"Ah,” the man said. "Go and wash. Supper is ready/’

When he went to bed that night his mmd was made up
to run away. He felt like an eagle: hard, sufficient, potent,
remorseless, strong. But that passed, though he did not thet
know that, like the eagle, his own flesh as well as all space
was still a cage.

McEaehern did not actually miss the heifer for two days.
Then he found the new suit where it was hidden in the
bam, on examining it he knew that it had never been worn.
He found the suit in the forenoon. But he said nothing
about it That evening he entered the bam where Joe was



141

milking. Sitting on the low stool, his head bent against the
cows flanks, the boy s body was now by height at least the
body of a man. But McEachem did not see that. If he saw
anything at all, it was the child, the orphan of five years
who had sat with the still and alert and unr ecking passive-
ness of an animal on the seat of his buggy on that Decem-
ber evening twelve years ago. “I dont see your heifer/" Mc-
Eachem said Joe didn’t answer. He bent above the bucket,
above the steady hissing of milk. McEachem stood behind
and above him, looking down at him. “I said, your heifer has
not come up.”

"I know it,” Joe said "I reckon she is down at the creek.
Ill look after her, being as she belongs to me.”

"Ah,” McEachem said. His voice was not raised. "The
creek at night is no place for a fifty-dollar cow.”

"It’ll be my loss, then,” Joe said. "It was my cow ”

"Was?” McEachem said. "Did you say was my cow?"

Joe did not look up. Between his fingers the milk hissed
steadily into the pail. Behind him he heard McEaehern
move. But Joe did not look around until the milk no longer
responded. Then he turned. McEachem was sitting on a
wooden block in the door. "You had better take the milk
on to the house first,” he said.

Joe stood, the pail swinging from his hand. His voice
was dogged though quiet. "I’ll find her in the morning.”

"Take the milk on to the house,” McEachem said. "I
will wait for you here.”

For a moment longer Joe stood there. Then he moved.
He emerged and went on to the kitchen. Mrs McEachem
came in as he was setting the pail onto the table. "Supper
is ready,” she said. "Has Mr McEachem come to the house
yet?”

Joe was turning away, back toward the door. "He’ll be
In soon,” he said. He could feel the woman, watching him.
She said, m a tone tentative, anxious:



142

"YouTl have just time to wash/'

“Well be in soon/" He returned to the barn. Mrs Mo
Eachem came to the door and looked after him. It was not
yet full dark and she could see her husband standing in
the bam door. She did not call. She just stood there and
watched the two men meet. She could not hear what they
said.

“She will be down at the creek, you say?"" McEachern
said.

“I said she may be. This is a good-sized pasture/"

“Ah/" McEachern said. Both their voices were quiet
“Where do you think she will be?""

“I dont know. I aint no cow. I dont know where she
might be/"

McEachern moved. “Well go see/" he said. They entered
the pasture in single file. The creek was a quarter of a
mile distant Against the dark band of trees where it
flowed fireflies winked and faded. They reached these trees.
The trunks of them were choked with marshy under-
growth, hard to penetrate even by day. “Call her/" Me-
Eachem said. Joe did not answer. He did not move. They
faced one another.

“She’s my cow/" Joe said. “You gave her to me. I raised
her from a calf because you gave her to me to be my own.""

“Yes/" McEachern said. “I gave her to you. To teach you
the responsibility of possessing, owning, ownership. The
responsibility of the owner to that which he owns under
Gods sufferance. To teach you foresight and aggrandise-
ment Call her.”

For a while longer they faced one another. Perhaps they
ware looking at one another. Then Joe turned and went
on along the marsh, McEachern following. “Why dont you
call her?"" he said. Joe did not answer. He did not seem
to be watching the marsh, the creek, at all. On the contrary
he was watching the single light which marked the house.



143

looking back now and then as if he were gauging his dis-
tance from it. They did not go fast, yet in time they came
to the boundary fence which marked the end of the pasture.
It was now full dark. When he reached the fence Joe turned
and stopped. Now he looked at the other. Again they stood
face to face. Then McEachern said: "What have you done
with that heifer?”

"I sold her,” Joe said.

“Ah. You sold her. And what did you get for her, might
I ask?”

They could not distinguish one another s face now. They
were just shapes, almost of a height, though McEachern
was the thicker. Above the white blur of his shirt Mc-
Eachem’s head resembled one of the marble cannonballs
on Civil War monuments. "It was my cow,” Joe said. "If
she wasn’t mine, why did you tell me she was? Why did
you give her to me?”

"You are quite right She was your own. I have not yet
chidden you for selling her, provided you got a good price.
And even if you were beat in the trade, which with a boy
of eighteen is more than like to be so, I will not chide you
for that. Though you would better have asked the advice
of someone older in the ways of the world. But you must
learn, as I did. What I ask is. Where have you put the
money for safekeeping?” Joe didn’t answer. They faced one
another. "You gave it to your fostermother to keep for you,
belike?”

"Yes,” Joe said. His mouth said it, told the lie. He had
not intended to answer at all. He heard his mouth say the
word with a kind of shocked astonishment. Then it was
too late. "I gave it to her to put away,” he said.

"Ah,” McEachern said He sighed, it was a sound almost
luxurious, of satisfaction and victory. "And you will doubt-
less say also that it was your fostermother who bought the
new suit which I found hid in the loft. You have revealed



144

every other sin of which you are capable: sloth, and in*
gratitude, and irreverence and blasphemy. And now I have
taken you in the remaining two: lying and lechery. What
else would you want with a new suit if you were not whor-
ing?” And then he acknowledged that the child whom he
had adopted twelve years ago was a man. Facing him, the
two of them almost toe to toe, he struck at Joe with his fist.

Joe took the first two blows; perhaps from habit, perhaps
from surprise. But he took them, feelmg twice the man’s
hard fist crash into his face. Then he sprang back, crouched,
licking blood, panting. They faced one another. “Dont you
hit me again,” he said.

Later, lying cold and rigid in his bed in the attic, he
heard their voices coming up the cramped stairs from the
room beneath.

1 bought it for him!” Mrs McEachem said. “I did! I
bought it with my butter money. You said that I could
have — could spend — Simon! Simon*”

""You are a clumsier liar than even he,” the man said.
His voice came, measured, harsh, without heat, up the
cramped stair to where Joe lay in bed. He was not listening
to it. "Kneel down. Kneel down. KNEEL DOWN, WOMAN.
Ask grace and pardon of God; not of me.”

She had always tried to be kind to him, from that first
December evening twelve years ago. She was waiting on
the porch — a patient, beaten creature without sex demarca-
tion at all save the neat screw of graying hair and the skirt
—when the buggy drove up. It was as though instead of
having been subtly slain and corrupted by the ruthless
and bigoted man into something beyond his intending and
her knowing, she had been hammered stubbornly thinner
and thinner like some passive and dully malleable metal,
into an attenuation of dumb hopes and frustrated desires
now faint and pale as dead ashes.



145

When the buggy stopped she came forward as though she
had already planned it, practiced it. how she would lift
him down from the seat and carry him into the house. He
had never been carried by a woman since he was big
enough to walk. He squirmed down and entered the
house on his own feet, marched in, small, shapeless in his
wrappings. She followed, hovering about him. She made
him sit down, it was as though she hovered about with a
land of strained alertness, an air baffled and alert, waiting
to spring it again and try to make himself and her act as
she had planned for them to act. Kneeling before him she
was trying to take off his shoes, until he realised what she
wanted. He put her hands away and removed the shoes
himself, not setting them onto the floor though. He held to
them. She stripped off his stockings and then she fetched
a basm of hot water, fetched it so immediately that anyone
but a child would have known that she must have had it
ready and waiting all day probably. He spoke for the first
time, then. “I done washed just yesterday,” he said.

She didn’t answer. She knelt before him while he
watched the crown of her head and her hands fumbling a
little clumsily about his feet. He didn’t try to help her
now. He didn’t know what she was trying to do, not even
when he was sitting with his cold feet in the warm water.
He didn’t know that that was all, because it felt too good.
He was waiting for the rest of it to begin; the part that
would not be pleasant, whatever it would be. This had never
happened to him before either.

Later she put him to bed. For two years almost he had
been dressing and undressing himself, unnoticed and un*
assisted save by occasional Alices. He was already too tired
to go to sleep at once, and now he was puzzled and hence
nervous, waiting until she went out so he could .sleep. Then
she did not go out. Instead she drew a chair up to the bed
and sat down. There was no fire in the room; it was cold.



146

She had a shawl now about her shoulders, huddled into
die shawl, her breath vaporising as though she were smok-
ing And he became wide awake now He was waiting for
the part to begin which he would not like, whatever xt was,
whatever it was that he had done. He didn’t know that tins
Was alL This had never happened to him before either.

It began on that night. He believed that it was to go on
for the xest of his life. At seventeen, looking back he could
see now the long series of trivial, clumsy, vam efforts bora
of frustration and fumbling and dumb instinct; the dishes
she would prepare for him m secret and then insist on his
accepting and eating them m secret, when he did not want
them and he knew that McEachern would not care any-
way; the times when, like tonight, she would try to get her-
self between him and the punishment which, deserved or
not, just or unjust, was impersonal, both the man and the
boy accepting it as a natural and inescapable fact until she,
getting in the way, must give it an odor, an attenuation,
and aftertaste.

Sometimes he thought that he would tell her alone, have
her who in her helplessness could neither alter it nor ignore
it, know it and need to hide it from the man whose imme-
diate and predictable reaction to the knowledge would so
obliterate it as a factor in their relations that it would never
appear again. To say to her in secret, in secret payment for
the secret dishes which he had not wanted: ""Listen. He
says he has nursed a blasphemer and an ingrate. I dare you
to tell him what he has nursed. That he has nursed a nigger
beneath his own roof, with his own food at his own table.”

Because she had always been kind to him. The man, the
hard, just, ruthless man, merely depended on him to act
in a certain way and to receive the as certam reward or
punishment, just as he could depend on the man to react
in a certain way to his own certain doings and misdoings.
It was the woman who, with a womans affinity and instinct



147

for secrecy for casting a faint taint of evil about the most
trivial and innocent actions. Behind a loose board in the
wall of his attic room she had hidden a small hoard of
money in a tin can. The amount was trivial and it was
apparently a secret to no one but her husband, and the boy
believed that he would not have cared. But it had never
been a secret from him. Even while he was still a child
she would take him with her when with all the intense and
mysterious caution of a playing child she would creep to
the attic and add to the hoard meagre and infrequent and
terrific nickels and dimes (fruit of what small chicanery
and deceptions with none anywhere under the sun to say
her nay he did not know), putting into the can beneath
his round grave eyes coins whose value he did not even
recognise. It was she who trusted him, who insisted on
trusting him as she insisted on his eating: by conspiracy,
in secret, making a secret of the very fact which the act of
trusting was supposed to exemplify.

It was not the hard work which he hated, nor the punish-
ment and injustice. He was used to that before he ever saw
either of them. He expected no less, and so he was neither
outraged nor surprised. It was the woman: that soft kind-
ness which he believed himself doomed to be forever victim
of and which he hated worse than he did the hard and
ruthless justice of men. 'She is trying to make me cry/ he
thought, lying cold and rigid in his bed, his hands beneath
his head and the moonlight falling across his body, hearing
the steady murmur of the mans voice as it mounted the
stairway on its first heavenward state; 'She was trying to
make me cry. Then she thinks that they would have had
me/



MOVING QUIETLY, HE TOOK THE ROPE FROM ITS HIDING PLACE.

One end of it was already prepared for making fast inside
the window. Now it took him no time at all to reach the
ground and to return; now, with more than a year of prac-
tice, he could mount the rope hand over hand, without once
touching the wah of the house, with the shadowlike agility
of a cat. Leaning from the window he let the free end whis-
per down. In the moonlight it looked not less frail than a
spider skein. Then, with his shoes tied together and strung
through his belt behind him, he slid down the rope, passing
swift as a shadow across the window where the old people
slept The rope hung directly before the window. He drew
it tautly aside, flat against the house, and tied it Then he
went on through the moonlight to the stable and mounted
to the loft and took the new suit from its hiding place. It
was wrapped in paper, carefully. Before unwrapping it he
felt with his hands about the folds of the paper. "He found
it/ he thought. "He knows/ He said aloud, whispering: "The
bastard. The son of a bitch.”

He dressed in the dark, swiftly. He was already late, be-
cause he had had to give them tine to get to sleep after all
the uproar about the heifer, the uproar which the woman

148



149

had caused by meddling after it was all over, settled for
the night, anyway. The bundle included a white shirt and
a tie. He put the tie mto his pocket, but he put on the coat
so that the white shirt would not be so visible in the moon-
light. He descended and emerged from the stable. The
new cloth, after his soft, oftenwashed overalls, felt rich
and harsh. The house squatted in the moonlight, dark,
profound, a little treacherous. It was as though in the
moonlight the house had acquired personality: threatful,
deceptive. He passed it and entered the lane. He took from
his pocket a dollar watch. He had bought it three days ago,
with some of the money. But he had never owned a watch
before and so he had forgot to wind it. But he did not need
the watch to tell him that he was already late.

The lane went straight beneath the moon, bordered on
each side by trees whose shadowed branches lay thick and
sharp as black paint upon the mild dust. He walked fast,
the house now behind him, himself now not visible from
the house. The highroad passed the lane a short distance
ahead. He expected at any moment to see the car rush past,
since he had told her that if he were not waiting at the
mouth of the lane, he would meet her at the schoolhouse
where the dance was being held. But no car passed,
and when he reached the highroad he could hear nothing.
The road, the night, were empty. ‘Maybe she has already
passed/ he thought. He took out the dead watch again and
looked at it. The watch was dead because he had had no
chance to wind it. He had been made late by them who had
given him no opportunity to wind the watch and so know
if he were late or not. Up the dark lane, in the now invisible
house, the woman now lay asleep, since she had done all
she could to make him late. He looked that way, up the
lane; he stopped in the act of looking and thinking; mind
and body as if on the same switch, believing that he had
seen movement among the shadows in the lane. Then he



150

thought that he had not, that it might perhaps have been
something in his mind projected like a shadow on a wall.
"But I hope it is him/ he thought. "I wish it was him. I wish
he would follow me and see me get into the car I wish he
would try to follow us. I wish he would try to stop me/ But
he could see nothing in the lane. It was empty, intermittent
with treacherous shadows Then he heard, from far down
the road toward town, the sound of the car. Looking, he
saw presently the glare of the lights

She was a waitress in a small, dingy, back street restau-
rant in town. Even a casual adult glance could tell that she
would never see thirty again. But to Joe she probably did
not look more than seventeen too, because of her smallness.
She was not only not tall, she was slight, almost childlike.
But the adult look saw that the smallness was not due to
any natural slenderness but to some inner corruption of
the spirit itself: a slenderness which had never been young,
in not one of whose curves anything youthful had ever
lived or lingered. Her hair was dark. Her face was promi-
nently boned, always downlooking, as if her head were set
so on her neck, a little out of line. Her eyes were like the
button eyes of a toy animal: a quality beyond even hard-
ness, without being hard.

It was because of her smallness that he ever attempted
her, as if her smallness should have or might have protected
her from the roving and predatory eyes of most men, leav-
ing his chances better. If she had been a big woman he
would not have dared. He would have thought, "It wont
be any use. She will already have a fellow, a man/

It began in the fall when he was seventeen. It was a day
in the middle of the week. Usually when they came to town
it would be Saturday and they would bring food with them
— cold dinner m a basket purchased and kept for that pur-
pose — with the intention of spending the day. This time



151

McEachern came to see a lawyer, with the intention of fin-
ishing his business and being home again by dinnertime.
But it was almost twelve o'clock when he emerged onto the
street where Joe waited for him. He came into sight looking
at his watch. Then he looked at a municipal clock in the
courthouse tower and then at the sun, with an expression
of exasperation and outrage. He looked at Joe also with
that expression, the open watch in his hand, his eyes cold,
fretted. He seemed to be examining and weighing for the
first time the boy whom he had raised from childhood.
Then he turned. "Come," he said. "It cant be helped now T

The town was a railroad division point. Even in mid-
week there were many men about the streets. The whole air
of the place was masculine, transient: a population even
whose husbands were at home only at intervals and on hol-
iday — a population of men who led esoteric lives whose
actual scenes were removed and whose intermittent pres-
ence was pandered to like that of patrons in a theatre.

Joe had never before seen the place to which McEachern
took him. It was a restaurant on a back street — a narrow
dingy doorway between two dingy windows. He did not
know that it was a restaurant at first. There was no sign
outside and he could neither smell nor hear food cooking.
What he saw was a long wooden counter lined with back-
less stools, and a big, blonde woman behind a cigar case
near the front and a clump of men at the far end of the
counter, not eating, who all turned as one and looked at
him and McEachern when they entered, through the smoke
of cigarettes. Nobody said anything at all. They just looked
at McEachern and Joe as if breathing had stopped with
talking, as if even the cigarette smoke had stopped and now
drifted aimlessly of its own weight. The men were not in
overalls and they all wore hats, and their faces were al]
alike: not young and not old, not farmers and not towns-
men either. They looked like people who had just got ofl



152

a train and who would be gone tomorrow and who did not
have any address.

Sitting on two of the backless stools at the counter,
McEachem and Joe ate. Joe ate fast because McEachem
was eating fast. Beside him the man, even in the act of eat-
ing, seemed to sit in a kind of stiffbacked outrage. The food
which McEachem ordered was simple: quickly prepared
and quickly eaten. But Joe knew that parsimony had no
part in this Parsimony might have brought them here in
preference to another place, but he knew that it was a de-
sire to depart quickly that had chosen the food. As soon
as he laid down his knife and fork, McEachem said,
“Come,” already getting down from his stool. At the cigar
counter McEachem paid the brasshaired woman. There
was about her a quality impervious to time: a belligerent
and diamondsurfaced respectability. She had not so much
as looked at them, even when they entered and even when
McEachem gave her money. Still without looking at them
she made the change, correctly and swiftly, sliding the
coins onto the glass counter almost before McEachem had
offered the bill; herself somehow definite behind the false
glitter of the careful hair, the careful face, like a carved
lioness guarding a portal, presenting respectability like a
shield behind which the clotted and idle and equivocal men
could slant their hats and their thwartfacecurled cigarettes.
McEachem counted his change and they went out, into the
street. He was looking at Joe again. He said: Til have you
remember that place. There are places in this world where
a man may go but a boy, a youth of your age, may not.
That is one of them. Maybe you should never have gone
there. But you must see such so you will know what to
avoid and shun. Perhaps it was as well that you saw it with
me present to explain and warn you. And the dinner there
is cheap.”

“What is the matter with it?” Joe said.



158

"That is the business of the town and not of yours. You
will only mark my words: 111 not have you go there again
unless I am with you. Which will not be again. We'll bring
dmnei next time, early or no early."

That was what he saw that day while he was eating
swiftly beside the unbending and quietly outraged man, the
two of them completely isolated at the center of the long
counter with at one end of it the brasshaired woman and
at the other the group of men, and the waitress with her
demure and downlookmg face and her big, too big, hands
setting the plates and cups, her head rising from beyond
the counter at about the height of a tall child. Then he and
McEachern departed. He did not expect ever to return It
was not that McEachern had forbidden him. He just did
not believe that his life would ever again chance there. It
was as if he said to himself, "They are not my people. I can
see them but I dont know what they are doing nor why.

I can hear them but I dont know what they are saymg nor
why nor to whom. I know that there is something about it
beside food, eating. But I dont know what. And I never will
know.'

So it passed from the surface of thinking. Now and then
during the next six months he returned to town, but he did
not again even see or pass the restaurant. He could have.
But he didn't think to. Perhaps he did not need to. More
often than he knew perhaps thinking would have suddenly
flowed into a picture, shaping, shaped: the long, barren,
somehow equivocal counter with the still, coldfaced, vio-
lenthaired woman at one end as though guarding it, and at
the other men with inwardleaning heads, smoking steadily,
lighting and throwing away their constant cigarettes, and
the waitress, the woman not much larger than a child going
oack and forth to the kitchen with her arms overladen with
dishes, having to pass on each journey within touching dis-
tance of the men who leaned with their slanted hats and



154

spoke to her through the cigarette smoke, murmured to her
somewhere near mirth or exultation, and her face musing,
demure, downcast, as if she had not heard. T dont even
know what they are saying to her/ he thought, thinking I
dont even know that what they are saying to her is some-
thing that men do not say to a passing child believing I do
not know yet that in the instant of sleep the eyelid clos-
ing prisons within the eye's self her face demure , pensive ;
tragic , sad, and young , , waiting , colored with all the vague
and formless magic of young desire . That already there is
something for love to feed upon : that sleeping I know now
why I struck refraining that Negro girl three years ago and
that she must know it too and he proud too , with waiting
and pride

So he did not expect to see her again, since love in the
young requires as little of hope as of desire to feed upon.
Very likely he was as much surprised by his action and
what it inferred and revealed as McEachern would have
been. It was on Saturday this time, in the spring now. He
had turned eighteen. Again McEachern had to see the law-
yer. But he was prepared now. ‘Ill be there an hour/" he
said, “You can walk about and see the town.” Again he
looked at Joe, hard, calculating, again a little fretted, like
a just man forced to compromise between justice and judg-
ment “Here,” he said. He opened his purse and took a coin
from it. It was a dime. “You might try not to throw it away
as soon as you can find someone who will take it. It's a
strange thing,” he said fretfully, looking at Joe, “but it seems
impossible for a man to learn the value of money without
first having to learn to waste it You will be here in one
hour.”

He took that coin and went straight to the restaurant.
He did not even put the com into his pocket. He did it
without plan or design, almost without volition, as if his
feet ordered his action and not his head. He carried the



155

dime clutched hot and uiiall in his palm as a child might.
He entered the screen door, clumsily, stumbling a little.
The blonde woman behind the cigar case (it was as if she
had not moved m the >ix months, not altered one strand of
her hard bright brassndged hair or even her dress) watched
him. At the far end of the counter the group of men with
their tilted hats and dieir cigarettes and their odor of bar-
bershops, watched him. The proprietor was among them.
He noticed, saw, tho proprietor for the first time. Like the
other men, the proprietor wore a hat and was smoking. He
was not a big man, not much bigger than Joe himself, with
a cigarette burning in one comer of his mouth as though
to be out of the way of talking. From that face squinted
and still behind the curling smoke from the cigarette which
was not touched once with hand until it burned down and
was spat out and ground beneath a heel, Joe was to acquire
one of his own mar merisms. But not yet. That was to come
later, when life had begun to go so fast that accepting
would take the place of knowing and believing. Now he
just looked at the man who leaned upon the counter from
the inward side, in a dirty apron which he wore as a foot-
pad might assume for the moment a false beard. The ac-
cepting was to come later, along with the whole sum of
entire outrage to credulity: these two people as husband
and wife, the establishment as a business for eating, with
the successive imported waitresses clumsy with the cheap
dishes of simple food as business justified; and himself ac-
cepting, taking, during his brief and violent holiday like a
young stallion in a state of unbelieving and ecstatic aston-
ishment in a hidden pasture of tired and professional mares,
himself in turn victim of nameless and unnumbered men.

But that was not yet He went to the counter, clutching
the dime. He believed that the men had all stopped talking
to watch him, because he could hear nothmg now save a
vicious frying sound from beyond the kitchen door, think-



156

ing She’s back there . That’s why I dont see her He slid onto
a stool He believed that they were all watching him. He
believed that the blonde woman behind the cigar case was
looking at him, and the proprietor too, across whose face
now the smoke of the cigarette would have become quite
still in its lazy vaporing. Then the proprietor spoke a sin-
gle word. Joe knew that he had not moved nor touched the
cigarette. “Bobbie,” he said

A man’s name. It was not thinking. It was too fast, too
complete: She’s gone . They have got a man in her place
I have wasted the dime , like he said He believed that he
could not leave now, that if he tried to go out, the blonde
woman would stop him. He believed that the men at the
back knew this and were laughing at him. So he sat quite
still on the stool, looking down, the dime clutched in his
palm. He did not see the waitress until the two overlarge
hands appeared upon the counter opposite him and into
sight. He could see the figured pattern of her dress and the
bib of an apron and the two bigknuckled hands lying on
the edge of the counter as completely immobile as if they
were something she had fetched in from the kitchen. “Cof-
fee and pie,” he said.

Her voice sounded downcast, quite empty. “Lemon ce-
coanut chocolate.”

In proportion to the height from which her voice came,
the hands could not be her hands at all, “Yes,” Joe said.

The hands did not move. The voice did not move.
“Lemon cocoanut chocolate. Which kind.” To the others
they must have looked quite strange. Facing one another
across the dark, stained, greasecrusted and frictionsmooth
counter, they must have looked a little like they were pray-
ing: the youth countryfaced, in clean and Spartan clothing,
with an awkwardness which invested him with a quality
unworldly and innocent; and the woman opposite him,
downcast, still, waiting, who because of her smallness par-



157


took likewise of that quality of his, of something beyond
flesh. Her face was highboned, gaunt. The flesh was taut
across her cheekbones, circled darkly about the eyes; be-
neath the lowered lids her eyes seemed to be without depth,
as if they could not even reflect. Her lower jaw seemed too
narrow to contain two rows of teeth.

"Cocoanut,” Joe said. His mouth said it, because imme-
diately he wanted to unsay it. He had only the dime. He
had been holding it too hard to have realised yet that
it was only a dune. His hand sweated about it, upon it.
He believed that the men were watching him and laughing
again. He could not hear them and he did not look at them.
But he believed that they were. The hands had gone away.
Then they returned, setting a plate and a cup before him.
He looked at her now, at her face. "How much is pie?” he
said

"Pie is ten cents.” She was just standing there before him,
beyond the counter, with her big hands again lying on the
dark wood, with that quality spent and waiting. She had
never looked at him. He said, in a faint, desperate voice;

"I reckon I dont want no coffee.”

For a while she did not move. Then one of the big hands
moved and took up the coffee cup; hand and cup vanished
He sat still, downlooking too, waiting. Then it came. It was
not the proprietor. It was the woman behind the cigar
case. "What's that?” she said.

"He dont want the coffee,” the waitress said. Her voice,
speaking, moved on, as if she had not paused at the ques-
tion. Her voice was flat, quiet. The other woman s voice
was quiet too.

"Didn't he order coffee too?” she said.

"No,” the waitress said, in that level voice that was still
in motion, going away. "I misunderstood

When he got out, when his spirit wrung with abasement
and regret and passionate for hiding scuttled past the cold



158

face of the woman behind the cigar case, he believed that
he knew he would and could never see her agam He did
not believe that he could bear to see her agam, even look
at the street, the dingy doorway, even from a distance,
again, not thinking yet Ifs terrible to be young Ifs terri-
ble Terrible When Saturdays came he found, invented,
reasons to decline to go to town, with McEachern watch-
ing him, though not with actual suspicion yet He passed
the days by working hard, too hard, McEachern contem-
plated the work with suspicion But there was nothing
which the man could know, deduce Worlong was permit-
ted him Then he could get the nights passed, since he
would be too tired to he awake And in time even the de-
spair and the regret and the shame grew less He did not
cease to remember it, to react it But now it had become
womout, like a gramophone record familiar only because
of the worn threading which blurred the voices After a
while even McEachern accepted a fact He said
€ T have been watching you lately And now there is noth-
ing for it but I must misdoubt my own eyes or else believe
that at last you are beginning s to accept what the Lord has
seen fit to allot you But I will not have you grow vain
because I have spoken well of it Youll have time and op-
portunity (and inclination too, I dont doubt) to make me
regret that I have spoken To fall into sloth and idleness
agam However, reward was created for man the same as
chastisement Do you see that heifer yonder? From today
that calf is your own See that I do not later regret it ”

Joe thanked him Then he could look at the calf and say,
aloud "That belongs to me ” Then he looked at it, and it
was agam too fast and too complete to be thinking That is
not a gift It is not even a promise it is a threat thinking,
1 didn’t ask for it He gave it to me I didn’t ask for it,’ be-
lieving God knows , I have earned it



159

It was a month later It was Saturday morning "I thought
you did not like town any more” McEachern said

"I reckon one more trip wont hurt me,” Joe said He had
a half dollar m his pocket Mrs McEachern had given it to
him He had asked for a nickel She insisted that he take
the half dollar He took it, holding it on his palm, cold, con-
temptuously

"I suppose not,” McEachern said “You have worked hard„
too But town is no good habit for a man who has yet to
make his way ”

He did not need to escape, though he would have, even
by violence perhaps But McEachern made it easy He went
to the restaurant, fast He entered without stumbling now
The waitress was not there Perhaps he saw, noticed that
she wasn't He stopped at the cigar counter, behind which
the woman sat, laying the half dollar on the counter “I owe
a nickel For a cup of coffee I said pie and coffee, before I
knew that pie was a dime I owe you a nickel ” He did not
look toward the rear The men were there, m their slanted
hats and with their cigarettes The proprietor was there,
waiting, Joe heard him at last, in the dirty apron, speaking
past the cigarette

“What is it? What does he want?”

“He says he owes Bobbie a nickel,” the woman said “He-
wants to give Bobbie a nickel” Her voice was quiet The
proprietor s voice was quiet

“Well for Christ's sake,” he said To Joe the room was full
of listening He heard, not hearing, he saw, not looking He
was now moving toward the door The half dollar lay on
the glass counter Even from the rear of the room the pro-
prietor could see it, smce he said, “What's that for?”

“He says he owes for a cup of coffee,” the woman said

Joe had almost reached the door “Here, Jack,” the man
said Joe did not stop “Give him his money ” the man said,



160

flat-voiced, not yet moving The cigarette smoke would curl
still across his face, unwmded by any movement "Give it
back to him ” the man said "I dont know what his racket is
But he cant work it here Give it back to him You better go
back to the farm, Hiram Maybe you can make a girl there
with a nickel "

Now he was m the street, sweating the half dollar, the
coin sweating his hand, larger than a cartwheel, feeling
He walked in laughter He had passed through the door
■upon it, upon the laughing of the men It swept and ear-
ned him along the street, then it began to flow past him,
dying away, letting him to earth, pavement He and the
waitress were facing one another She did not see him at
once, walking swiftly, downlookmg, in a dark dress and a
hat Again, stopped, she did not even look at him, having
already looked at him, allseemg, like when she had set the
coffee and the pie on the counter She said, "Oh And you
come back to give it to me Before them And they kidded
you Well, say ”

"I thought you might have had to pay for it, yourself X
thought — ”

"Well, say Can you tie that Can you, now ”

They were not looking at one another, standing face to
face To another they must have looked like two monks met
during the hour of contemplation m a garden path "I lust
thought that I

"Where do you live?” she said "In the country? Well, say
What s your name?”

"It’s not McEachem,” he said "Its Christmas ”

"Christmas? Is that your name? Christmas? Well, say *

On the Saturday afternoons during and after adolescence
he and the other four or five boys hunted and fished He
saw girls only at church, on Sunday They were associated



161

with Sunday and with church So he could not notice them
To do so would be, even to him, a retraction o£ his religious
hatred But he and the other boys talked about gnls Per-
haps some of them — the one who arranged with die Negro
girl that afternoon, for instance — knew “They all want to,”
he told the otheis “But sometimes they cant” The others
did not know that They did not know that all girls wanted
to, let alone that there were times when diey could not
They thought differently But to admit that they did not
know the latter would be to admit that diey had not dis-
covered the former So they listened while the boy told
them “It’s something that happens to them once a month ”
He described his idea of the physical ceremony Perhaps he
knew Anyway he was graphic enough, convincing enough
If he had tried to describe it as a mental state, something
which he only believed, they would not have listened But
he drew a picture, physical, actual, to be discerned by the
sense of smell and even of sight It moved them the tem-
porary and abject helplessness of that which tantalised and
frustrated desiie, the smooth and superior shape in which
volition dwelled doomed to be at stated and inescapable
intervals victims of periodical filth That was how the hoy
told it, with the other five listening quietly, lookmg at one
another, questioning and secret On the next Saturday Joe
did not go hunting with them McEachern thought that he
had already gone, since the gun was missing But Joe was
hidden m the barn He stayed there all that day On the
Saturday following he did go, but alone, early, before the
boys called for him But he did not hunt He was not three
miles from home when m the late afternoon he shot a
sheep He found the flock m a hidden valley and stalked
and killed one with the gun Then he knelt, his hands m the
yet warm blood of the dying beast, trembling, drymouthed,
backglaring Then he got over it, recovered He did not



162

forget what the boy had told hun He just accepted it He
found that he could h\ e with it side by side with it It was
as if he said, illogical and desperately calm All right It is
so, then But not to me Not m my life and my love Then it
was three or four years ago and he had forgotten it, in the
sense that a fact is forgotten when it once succumbs to the
mind's insistence that it be i icither true nor false

He met the waitress on the Monday night following the
Saturday on which he had tried to pay foi the cup of cof-
fee He did not have the rope then He climbed from his
window and dropped the ten feet to the earth and walked
the five miles into town He did not think at all about how
he would get back into Lis room

He reached town and went to the comer where she had
told him to wait Jt was a quiet corner and he was quite
early, thinking I anil have to remember To let her show
me what to do aid how to do it and when To not let her
find out that I dnnt know , that 1 will have to find out from
her

He had be n waiting for over an hour when she
appeared He 1 ad been that early She came up on foot She
came and stoud before him, small, with that air steadfast,
waiting, do » / clocking, coming up out of die darkness
“Here you ue,” she said

“I got h'ne soon as I could I had to wait for them to go
to sleep J was afraid I would be late ”

“Have /on been here long? How long?”

“I doni know I ran, most of the way I was afraid I would
be late ”

“You ran? All them three miles?”

“It\ five miles If s not three ”

“Well, say ” Then they did not talk They stood there, two
shadows facing one another More than a year later, re-
meinbermg that night, he said, suddenly knowing It was
WU she was waiting for me to hit her “Well,” she said.



163


He had begun now to tremble a little He could smell
hei, smell the waiting still, wise, a little weary, thinking
Shes waiting for me to start and I dont know how Even
to himself his voice sounded idiotic “I reckon its late*

“Late?”

“I thought maybe they would be waiting for you Wait-
ing up until you *

“Waiting for Waiting for 5S Her voice died
ceased She said, not moving, they stood like two shadows
“I hve with Mame and Max You know The restaurant You
ought to remember them, trying to pay that mckel
She began to laugh There was no mirth m it, nothing xn it.
“When I think of that When I think of you commg in there,
with that mckel ” Then she stopped laughing There was no
cessation of mirth in that, either The still, abject, down-
looking voice reached him “I made a mistake tomght I for-
got something ” Perhaps she was waiting for him to ask her
what it was But he did not He just stood there, with a still,,
downspeaking voice dying somewhere about his ears He
had forgot about the shot sheep He had lived with the fact
which the older boy had told him too long now With the
slam sheep he had bought immunity from it for too long
now for it to be alive So he could not understand at first
what she was trying to tell him They stood at the comer.
It was at the edge of town, where the street became a road
that ran on beyond the ordered and measured lawns, be-
tween small, random houses and barren fields — the small)
cheap houses which compose the purlieus of such towns.
She said, “Listen I’m sick tonight ” He did not understand*
He said nothing Perhaps he did not need to understand
Perhaps he had already expected some fateful mischance,
thinking. It was too good to be true, anyway, thinking too
fast for even thought In a moment she will vanish She will
not be And then I will be back home , m bed > not having
left it at all Her voice went on “I forgot about the day of



164

the month when I told you Monday night You surprised
me, I guess There on the street Saturday I foigot what day
it was, anyhow Until after you had gone ”

His voice was as quiet as hers "How sick? Haven’t you
got some medicine at home that you can take?”

"Haven’t I got 95 Her voice died She said, "Well,
say ” She said suddenly "It's late And you with four miles
to walk ”

"Ive already walked it now I’m here now ” His voice was
quiet, hopeless, calm e T reckon it’s getting late,” he said
Then something changed Not looking at him, she sensed
something befoie she heaid it m his hard \oice "What land
of sickness have you got?”

She didn’t answer at once Then she said, still, down-
looking “You haven’t ever had a sweetheart, yet I’ll bet
you haven’t ” He didn’t answer "Have you?” He didn’t an-
swer She moved She touched him for the first time She
came and took his arm, lightly, m both hands Looking
down, he could see the dark shape of the lowered head
which appeared to have been set out of line a little on the
neck when she was bom She told him, halting, clumsily,
using the only words which she knew perhaps But he had
heard it before He had already fled backward, past the
slam sheep, the price paid for immunity, to the afternoon
when, sitting on a creek bank, he had been not hurt or
astonished so much as outraged The arm which she held
jerked free She did not believe that he had intended to
strike her, she believed otherwise, m fact But the result
was the same As he faded on down the road, the shape,
the shadow, she believed that he was running She could
hear his feet for some time after she could no longer see
hum She did not move at once She stood as he had left her,
motionless, downlookmg, as though waiting for the blow
which she had already received



165


He was not running But he was walking fast, and an a
direction that was taking him farther yet from home, from
the house five miles away which he had left by climbing
from a window and which he had not yet planned any way
of re-entermg He went on down the road fast and turned
from it and sprang over a fence, into plowed earth Some-
thing was growing m the furrows Beyond were woods,,
trees He reached the woods and entered, among the hard
trunks, the branchshadowed quiet, hardfeelmg, hardsmell-
ing, invisible In the notseemg and the hardknowing as
though m a cave he seemed to see a diminishing row of
suavely shaped urns m moonlight, blanched And not one
was perfect Each one was cracked and from each crack
there issued something liquid, deathcolored, and foul He
touched a tree, leaning his propped arms against it, seeing
the ranked and moonlit urns He vomited

On the next Monday night he had the rope He was wait-
ing at the same comer, he was quite early again Then he
saw her She came up to where he stood “I thought maybe
you wouldn't be here," she said

"Did you?” He took her arm, drawing her on down the
road

"Where are we going? 5 " she said He didn't answer, draw-
ing her on She had to trot to keep up She trotted clumsily*
an animal impeded by that which distinguished her from
animals her heels, her clothes, her smallness He drew her
from the road, toward the fence which he had crossed a
week ago "Wait," she said, the words jolting from her
mouth "The fence — I cant — " As she stooped to go through,
between the strands of wire which he had stepped over, her
dress caught He leaned and jerked it free with a ripping
sound

"111 buy you another one," be said She said nothing
She let herself be half carried and half dragged among the
growing plants, the furrows, and into the woods, the trees*



166

He kept the rope, neatly coiled, behind the same loose
board in his attic room where Mrs McEaehern kept her
hoard of mckels and dimes, with the difference that the rope
was thrust farther back mto the hole than Mrs McEachem
could reach He had got the idea from her Sometimes, with
the old couple snoring m the room beneath, when he lifted
out the silent rope he would think of the paradox Some-
times he thought about telling her, of showing her where
he kept hidden the implement of his sm, having got the
idea, learned how and where to hide it, from her But he
knew that she would merely want to help him conceal it,
that she would want him to sm in order that she could help
him hide it, that she would at last make such a todo of
meaningful whispers and signals that McEachem would
have to suspect something despite himself

Thus he began to steal, to take money from the hoard
It is very possible that the woman did not suggest it to him,
never mentioned money to him It is possible that he did
not even know that he was paying with money for pleas-
ure It was that he had watched for years Mrs McEachem
hide money m a certain place Then he himself had some-
thing which it was necessary to hide He put it m the
safest place which he knew Each time he hid or retrieved
the rope, he saw the tin can containing money

The first time he took fifty cents He debated for some
time between fifty cents and a quarter Then he took the
fifty cents because that was the exact sum he needed With
it he bought a stale and flyspecked box of candy from a
man who had won it for ten cents on a punching board an
a store He gave it to the waitress It was the first thing
which he had ever given her He gave it to her as if no one
had ever thought of giving her anything before Her expres-
sion was a little strange when she took the tawdry, shabby
box into her big hands She was sitting at the tune on her



167

bed m her bedroom m the small house where she lived
with the man and woman called Max and Mame One night
about a week before the man came into the room She was
undressing, sitting on the bed while she removed her stock-
ings He came m and leaned agamst the bureau, smoking

"A rich farmer,” he said "John Jacob Astor from the cow-
shed”

She had covered herself, sitting on the bed, still, down-
looking "He pays me ”

"With what? Hasn’t he used up that nickel yet?” He
looked at her “A setup for hayseeds That’s what I brought
you down here from Memphis for Maybe fd better start
giving away gmb too ”

"I’m not doing it on your time ”

"Sure I cant stop you I just hate to see you A Idd, that
never saw a whole dollar at one time m his life With this
town full of guys making good jack, that would treat you
right ”

"Maybe I like him Maybe you hadn’t thought of that ”

He looked at her, at the still and lowered crown of her
head as she sat on the bed, her hands on her lap He leaned
against the bureau, smoking He said, "Mame*” After a while
he said again, "Mame* Come in here ” The walls were thm.
After a while the big blonde woman came up the hall, with-
out haste They could both hear her She entered "Get this,”
the man said "She says maybe she likes him best It’s Romeo
and Juliet For sweet Jesus!”

The blonde woman looked at the dark crown of the wait-
ress’ head "What about that?”

"Nothing It’s fine Max Confrey presenting Miss Bobbie
Allen, the youth’s companion ”

"Go out,” the woman said

"Sure I just brought her change for a nickel” He went
out The waitress had not moved The blonde woman went



168

to the bureau and leaned against it, looking at the other s
lowered head

“Does he ever pay you?” she said

The waitress did not move “Yes He pays me ”

The blonde woman looked at her, leaning against the bu-
reau as Max had done “Coming all the way down here
from Memphis Bringing it all the way down here to give it
away ”

The waitress did not move Tm not hurting Max ”

The blonde woman looked at the other s lowered head
Then she turned and went toward the door “See that you
dont,” she said “This wont last forever These little towns
wont stand for thn> long I know I came from one of them *
Sitting on the bed, holding the cheap, florid candy box m
her hands, she sat as she had sat while the blonde woman
talked to her But it was now Joe who leaned against the
bureau and looked at her She began to laugh She laughed,
holding the gaudy box m her bigknuclded hands Joe
watched her He watched her rise and pass him, her face
lowered She passed through the door and called Max by
name Joe had never seen Max save m the restaurant, m
the hat and the dirty apron When Max enteied he was
not even smoking He thrust out his hand “How are you,
Romeo?” he said

Joe was shaking hands almost before he had recogmsed
the man “My name’s Joe McEachern ” he said The blonde
woman had also entered It was also the first time he had
even seen her save in the lestaurant He saw her enter,
watching her, watching the waitress open the box She ex-
tended it

“Joe brought it to me” she said

The blonde woman looked at the box, once, She did not
even move her hand “Thanks,” she said The man also
looked at the box, without movmg Ins hand
“Well, well, well,” he said “Sometimes Christmas lasts a



169

good while Hey, Romeo?” Joe had moved a little awaj/
from the bureau He had never been m the house befoie
He was looking at the man, with on his face an expression
a little placative and baffled though not alarmed, watch-
ing the mans inscrutable and monklike face But he said
nothing It was the waitress who said,

"If you dont like it, you dont have to eat it ” He watched
Max, watching his face, hearing the waitress’ voice, the
voice downlookmg “Not doing you nor nobody else any
harm Not on his time ” He was not watching her
nor the blonde woman either He was watching Max, with
that expression puzzled, placative, not afraid The blonde
woman now spoke, it was as though they were speakmg
of him and in his presence and m a tongue which they
knew that he did not know

"Come on out,” the blonde woman said
"Foi sweet Jesus,” Max said T was ]ust going to give
Romeo a drink on the house ”

"Does he want one' 5 ” the blonde woman saM Even when
she addressed Joe directly it was as if she still spoke to Max,
"Do you want a drink?”

"Dont hold him in suspense because of his past behavior.
Tell him it’s on the house ”

"I dont know,” Joe said "I never tried it ”

"Never tried anything on the house,” Max said "For
sweet Jesus ” He had not looked at Joe once again after he
entered the room Again it was as if they talked at and be-
cause of him, m a language which he did not understand,
“Come on,” the blonde woman said "Come on, now”
They went out The blonde woman had never looked
at him at all, and the man, without looking at him, had
never ceased Then they were gone Joe stood beside the
bureau In the middle of the floor the waitress stood, down-
lookmg, with the open box of candy m her hand The room
was close, smelling of stale scent Joe had never seen it be-



170

fore He had not believed that he ever would The shades
were drawn The single bulb burned at the end of a cord,
shaded by a magazine page pmned about it and already
turned brown from the heat “It's all right/’ he said ‘It’s all
nght ” She didn’t answer nor move He thought of the dark-
ness outside, the night m which they had been alone be-
fore “Let’s go/’ he said

“Go?” she said Then he looked at her “Go where?” she
said “What for' 5 ” Still he did not understand her He
watched her come to the bureau and set the box of candy
upon it While he watched, she began to take her clothes
off, ripping them off and flinging them down

He said, “Here? In here?” It was the first time he had
ever seen a naked woman, though he had been her lover
for a month But even then he did not even know that he
had not known what to expect to see

That night they talked They lay m the bed, in the dark,
talking Oi he talked, that is All the time he was thinking,
‘Jesus Jesus So this is it’ He lay naked too, beside her,
touching her with his hand and talking about her Not
about where she had come fi om and what she had even
done, but about her body as if no one had ever done this
before, with her or with anyone else It was as if with
speech he weie learning about womens bodies, with the
curiosity of a child She told him about the sickness of the
first night It did not shock him now Like the nakedness
and the physical shape, it was like something which had
never happened or existed before So he told her in turn
what he knew to tell He told about the Negro girl m the
mill shed on that afternoon three years ago He told her
quietly and peacefully, lying beside her, touching her Per-
haps he could not even have said if she listened or not
Then he said, “You noticed my skm, my hair,” waiting for
her to answer, his hand slow on her body



171

She whispered also "Yes I thought maybe you were a
foreigner That you never come from around here *

"It's different from that, even More than just a foreigner
You cant guess ”

"What? How more different?”

"Guess ”

Their voices were quiet It was still, quiet, night now
known, not to be desired, pined for “I cant What are you?”

His hand was slow and quiet on her invisible flank He
did not answer at once It was not as if he were tantalising
her It was as if he just had not thought to speak on She
asked him agam Then he told her "I got some nigger blood
in me ”

Then she lay perfectly still, with a different stillness But
he did not seem to notice it He lay peacefully too, his hand
slow up and down her flank “Youre what?” she said
"I think I got some nigger blood m me ” His eyes were
closed, his hand slow and unceasing "I dont know I be-
lieve I have ”

She did not move She said at once “You re lying ”

"All right,” he said, not moving, his hand not ceasing
"I dont believe it,” her voice said m the darkness
"All right,” he said, his hand not ceasing
The next Saturday he took another half dollar from Mrs
McEachern s hiding place and gave it to the waitress A
day or two later he had reason to believe that Mrs McEach-
ern had missed the money and that she suspected him of
having taken it Because she lay in wait for him until he
knew that she knew that McEachern would not interrupt
them Then she said, "Joe ” He paused and looked at her,
knowing that she would not be lookmg at him She said,
not looking at him, her voice flat, level "I know how a
young man growing up needs money, More than p— Mr
McEachern gives you ” He looked at her, until her



172

voice ceased and died away Apparently he was waiting
for it to cease Then he said,

“Money? What do I want with money?”

On the next Saturday he earned two dollars chopping
wood for a neighbor He lied to McEachem about where
he was going and where he had been and what he had
done there He gave the money to the waitress McEachern
found out about the work Perhaps he beheved that Joe
had hidden the money Mrs McEachern may have told him
so

Perhaps two nights a week Joe and the waitress went to
her room He did not know at first that anyone else had
ever done that Perhaps he beheved that some pecuhar dis-
pensation had been made m his favor, for his sake Very
likely until the last he still beheved that Max and Marne
had to be placated, not for the actual fact, but because of
his presence there But he did not see them again m the
house, though he knew that they were there But he did not
know for certam if they knew that he was there or had ever
returned after the night of the candy

Usually they met outside, went somewhere else or just
loitered on the way to where she lived Perhaps he beheved
up to the last that he had suggested it Then one night she
did not meet him where he waited He waited until the
clock m the courthouse struck twelve Then he went on to
where she lived He had never done that before, though
even then he could not have said that she had ever forbid-
den him to come there unless she was with him But he
went there that night, expecting to find the house dark and
asleep The house was dark, but it was not asleep He knew
that, that beyond die dark shades of hei room people were
not asleep and that she was not there alone How he knew
it he could not have said Neither would he admit what
he blew c Ids just Max/ he thought TPs just Max" But he
knew better He knew that there was a man m the room



173

with her He did not see her for two weeks, though he
knew that she was waiting for him Then one night he was
at the comer when she appeared He struck her, without
warning, feeling her flesh He knew then what even yet he
had not believed "Oh,” she cried He struck her agam
"Not here?” she whispered "Not here?” Then he found that
she was crying He had not cried since he could remember
He cried, cursing her, striking her Then she was holding
him Even the reason for striking her was gone then "Now,
now,” she said "Now, now ”

They did not leave the comer even that mght They did
not walk on loitering nor leave the road They sat on a
sloping grassbank and talked She talked this time, telling
him It did not take much telling He could see now what
he discovered that he had known all the time the idle
men m the restaurant, with their cigarettes bobbing as they
spoke to her m passing, and she going back and forth con-
stant, downioolcmg, and abject Listening to her voice, he
seemed to smell the odorreek of all anonymous men above
dirt Her head was a little lowered as she talked, the big
hands still on her lap He could not see, of course He did
not have to see "I thought you knew,” she said
"No,” he said "I reckon I didn't ”

"I thought you did ”

"No,” he said "I dont reckon I did ”

Two weeks later he had begun to smoke, squinting his
face against the smoke, and he drank too He would drink
at night with Max and Mame and sometimes three or four
other men and usually another woman or two, sometimes
from the town, but usually strangers who would come in
from Memphis and stay a week or a month, as waitresses
behind the restaurant counter where the idle men gathered
all day He did not always know their names, but he could
cock his hat as they did, during the evenings behind the
drawn shades of the diningroom at Max's he cocked it so



174

and spoke of the waitress to the others, even in her pres-
ence, in his loud, drunken, despairing young voice, calling
her his whore Now and then in Max’s car he took her
to dances m the country, always careful that McEachem
should not hear about it “1 dont know which he would be
madder at,” he told her, “at you or at the dancing ” Once
they had to put him to bed, helpless, m the house where he
had not even ever dreamed at one time that he could enter
The next morning the waitress drove him out home before
daylight so he could get mto the house before he was
caught And dunng the day McEachem watched him with
dour and grudging approval

“But you have still plenty of time to make me regret that
heifer,” McEachem said



9


MCEACHERN LAY IN BED THE ROOM WAS DARE, BUT HE

was not asleep He lay beside Mrs McEachem, whom he
did believe to be sleeping, thinking fast and hard, thinking,
*The suit has been worn But when It could not have been
during the day, because he is beneath my eyes, except oh
Saturday afternoons But on any Saturday afternoon h*
could go to the bam, remove and hide the fit clothing
which I require him to wear, and then don apparel which
he would and could need only as some adjunct to sinning *
It was as if he knew then, had been told That would infer
then that the garments were worn m secret, and therefore
in all likelihood, at night And if that were so, he refused ta
believe that the boy had other than one purpose lechery*
He had never committed lechery himself and he had not
once failed to refuse to listen to anyone who talked about
it Yet within about thirty minutes of intensive thinking he
knew almost as much of Joe's domgs as Joe himself could
have told him, with the exception of names and places
Very likely he would not have believed those even from*
Joes mouth, since men of his kind usually have just a&
firmly fixed convictions about the mechanics, the theatnng
of evil as about those of good Thus bigotry and clairvoy*

m



176

anee were practically one, only the bigotry was a little slow,
for as Joe, descending on his rope, shd like a fast shadow
across the open and moonfilled window behind which
McEachem lay, McEachem did not at once recognise him
or perhaps believe what he saw, even though he could see
the very rope itself And when he got to the window Joe
had already drawn the rope back and made it fast and was
now on his way toward the barn As McEachem watched
him from the window, he felt something of that pure and
impersonal outrage which a judge must feel were he to see
a man on trial for his life lean and spit on the bailiff s sleeve
Hidden in the shadows of the lane halfway between the
house and the road, he could see Joe at the mouth of the
lane He too heard the car and saw it come up and stop
and Joe get into it Possibly he did not even care who else
was in it Perhaps he already knew, and his purpose had
been merely to see in which direction it went Perhaps he
beheved that he knew that too, since the car could have
gone almost anywhere m a country full of possible destina-
tions with roads that led to them Because he turned now
back toward the house, walking fast, in that same pure and
impersonal outrage, as if he beheved so that he would be
guided by some greater and purer outrage that he would
not even need to doubt personal faculties In carpet slip-
pers, without a hat, his nightshirt thrust mto his trousers
and his braces dangling, he went straight as an arrow to
the stable and saddled his big, old, strong white horse and
returned back down the lane and to the road at a heavy
gallop, though Mrs McEachem from the kitchen door
called his name when he rode out of the lot He turned mto
the road at that slow and ponderous gallop, the two of
them, man and beast, leaning a little stiffly forward as
though in some juggemautish simulation of terrific speed
though the actual speed itself was absent, as if m that cold
and implacable and undeviatmg conviction of both om-



177

rupotenee and clairvoyance of which they both partook
known destination and speed were not necessary

He rode at that same speed straight to the place which
he sought and which he had found out of a whole night and
almost a whole half of a county, though it was not that
far distant He had gone hardly four miles when he heard
music ahead and then he saw beside the road lights m a
school house, a oneroom building He had known where
the building was, but he had had neither reason nor man-
ner of knowing that there would be a dance held in it
But he rode straight to it and into the random shadows
of parked cars and buggies and saddled horses and mules
which filled the grove which surrounded the school, and
dismounted almost before the horse had stopped He did
not even tether it He got down, and in the carpet slippers
and the dangling braces and Ins round head and his short,
blunt, outraged beard ran toward the open door and the
open windows where the music came and where kerosene-
lit shadows passed m a ceitain orderly uproar
Perhaps, if he weie thinking at all, he believed that he
had been guided and were now being propelled by some
militant Michael Himself as he entered the room Appar-
ently his eyes were not even momentarily at fault with the
sudden light and the motion as he thrust among bodies
with turned heads as, followed by a wake of astonishment
and incipient pandemonium, he ran toward the youth
whom he had adopted of his own free will and whom he
had tried to raise as he was convinced was nght Joe and
the waitress were dancing and Joe had not seen him yet
The woman had never seen him but once, but perhaps
she remembered him, or perhaps his appearance now was
enough Because she stopped dancing and upon her face
came an expression very like horror, which Joe saw and
turned As he turned, McEaehern was upon them Neither
had McEaehern ever seen the woman but once, and very



178

likely then he had not looked at her, just as he had re-
fused to listen when men spoke of fornication Yet he went
straight to her, ignoring Joe for the moment "Away, Jeze-
bel*” he said His voice thundered, into the shocked silence,
the shocked surroundmg faces beneath the kerosene lamps,
into the ceased music, into the peaceful moonlit night of
j^oung summer "Away, harlot*”

Perhaps it did not seem to him that he had been moving
fast nor that his voice was loud Very likely he seemed to
himself to be standing just and rocklike and with neither
haste nor anger while on all sides the sluttishness of weak
human men seethed m a long sigh of terror about the ac-
tual representative of the wiathful and retributive Throne
Perhaps they were not even his hands which struck at the
face of the youth whom he had nurtured and sheltered and
clothed from a child, and perhaps when the face ducked
the blow and came up again it was not the face of that
child But he could not have been surprised at that, since it
was not that child’s face which he was concerned with it
was the face of Satan, which he knew as well And when,
staring at the face, he walked steadily toward it with his
hand still raised, very likely he walked towaid it m the furi-
ous and dreamlike exaltation of a martyr who has already
been absolved, into the descending chair which Joe swung
at his head, and into nothingness Perhaps the nothingness
astonished him a little, but not much, and not for long

Then to Joe it all rushed away, roaung, dying, leaving
him m the center of the floor, the shattered chair clutched
on his hand, looking down at his adopted father McEachem
lay on his back He looked quite peaceful now He ap-
peared to sleep bluntheaded, indomitable even m repose,
even the blood on his forehead peaceful and qmet

Joe was breathing hard He could hear it, and also some-
thing else, thin and shrill and far away He seemed to listen



179

to it for a long time before he recognised it for a voice, a
womans voice He looked and saw two men holding her
and she writhing and struggling, her hair shaken forward,
her white face wrung and ugly beneath the splotches of
savage paint, her mouth a small jagged hole filled with
shrieking “Calling me a harlot!” she screamed, wrenching
at the men who held her “That old son of a bitch ! Let gol
Let go^” Then her voice stopped making words again and
just screamed, she writhed and threshed, trying to bite the
hands of the men who struggled with her

Still carrying the shattered chair Joe walked toward her
About the walls, huddling, clotted, the others watched him
the girls in stiff offcolors and mailorder stockings and heels,
the men, young men m illcut and boardlike garments also
from the mailorder, with hard, ruined hands and eyes al-
ready leveahng a heritage of patient brooding upon end-
less furrows and the slow buttocks of mules Joe began to
run, brandishing the chair “Let her go!” he said At once
she ceased struggling and turned on him the fury, the
shrieking, as if she had just seen him, realised that he was
also there

“And you! You brought me here Goddamn bastard clod-
hopper Bastard you! Son of a bitch you and him too Put-
ting him at me that never ever saw — ” Joe did not appear
to be running at anyone m particular, and his face was
quite calm beneath the uplifted chair The others fell back
from about the woman, freeing her, though she continued
to wrench her arms as if she did not yet reahse it

“Get out of here!” Joe shouted He whirled, swinging the
chair, yet his face was still quite calm “Back 1 ” he said,
though no one had moved toward him at all They were
all as still and as silent as the man on the floor He swung
the chair, backing now toward the door “Stand back! I
said I would kill him some day! I told him so!” He swung
the chair about him, calmfaced, backing toward the door



180


“Dont a one of you move, now/" he said, looking steadily
and ceaselessly at faces that might have been masks Then
he flung the chan- down and whirled and sprang out the
door, into soft, dappled moonlight He overtook the wait-
ress as she was getting into the car m which they had come
He was panting, yet his voice was calm too a sleeping face
merely breathing hard enough to make sounds “Get on
back to town,” he said ‘Til be there soon as I ” Ap-
parently he was not aware of what he was saymg nor of
what was happening, when the woman turned suddenly
in the door of die car and began to beat him m the face he
did not move, his voice did not change “Yes That’s right
111 be there soon as I — ” Then he turned and ran, while she
was still striking at him

He could not have known where McEachern had left the
horse, nor for certain if it was even there Yet he ran straight
to it, with something of his adopted fathers complete faith
m an infallibility m events He got onto it and swung it
back toward the road The car had already turned into the
road He saw the tailhght dimmish and disappear

The old, strong, farmbred horse returned home at its
slow and steady canter The youth upon its back rode
lightly, balanced lightly, leaning well forward, exulting per-
haps at that moment as Faustus had, of having put behind
now at once and for all the Shalt Not, of being free at last
of honor and law In the motion the sweet sharp sweat of
the horse blew, sulphuric, the invisible wind flew past He
cried aloud, “I have done id I have done id I told them I
would!”

He entered the lane and rode through the moonlight up
to the house without slowing He had thought it would be
dark, but it was not He did not pause, the careful and hid-
den rope were as much a part of his dead life now as honor
and hope, and the old wearying woman who had been one
of his enemies for thirteen years and who was now awake,



181

waiting for him The light was in hers and McEachem's
bedroom and she was standing in the door* with a shawl
over her nightdress “Joe?” she said He came down the hall
fast His face looked as McEachern had seen it as the chair
fell Perhaps she could not yet see it good “What is it?” she
said "Paw rode away on the horse I heard * She saw
his face then But she did not even have tune to step back
He did not strike her, his hand on her arm was quite gentle
It was just hurried, getting her out of the path, out of the
door He swept her aside as he might have a curtain across
the door

“He s at a dance,” he said “Get away, old woman ” She
turned, clutching the shawl with one hand, the other
against the door face as she fell back, watching him as
he crossed the room and began to run up the stairs which
mounted to his attic Without stopping he looked back
Then she could see his teeth shining m the lamp “At a
dance, you hear? He’s not dancmg, though” He laughed
back, into the lamp, he turned his head and his laughing,
running on up the stairs, vanishing as he ran, vanishing up-
ward from the head down as if he were running headfirst
and laughing into something that was obliterating him like
a picture m chalk bemg erased from a blackboard

She followed, toiling up the stairs She began to follow
almost as soon as he passed her, as if that implacable ur-
gency which had carried her husband away had returned
like a cloak on the shoulders of the boy and had been
passed from him in turn to her She dragged herself up the
cramped stair, clutching the rail with one hand and the
shawl with the other She was not speaking, not calling to
him It was as though she were a phantom obeymg the
command sent back by the absent master Joe had not
lighted his lamp But the room was filled with refracted
moonglow, and even without that very likely she could
have told what he was doing She held herself upnght



182

by the wall, fumbling her hand along the wall until she
reached the bed and sank onto it, sitting It had taken her
some time, because when she looked toward where the
loose plank was, he was already approaching toward the
bed, where the moonlight fell directly, and she watched
him empty the tin can onto the bed and sweep the small
mass of corns and bills into his hand and ram the hand mto
his pocket Only then did he look at her as she sat, back-
fallen a little now, propped on one arm and holding the
shawl with the other hand "I didn't ask you for it/’ he said
"Remember that I didn’t ask, because I was afraid you
would give it to me I just took it Dont forget that” He
was turning almost before his voice ceased She watched
him turn mto the lamplight which fell up the stair, de-
scending He passed out of sight, but she could still hear
him She heard him m the hall again, fast, and after a while
she heard the horse again, galloping, and after a while the
sound of the horse ceased

A clock was striking one somewhere when Joe urged the
now spent old horse through the mam stLeet of town The
horse had been bieathing hard for some time now, but Joe
still held it at a stumbling trot with a heavy stick that fell
rhythmically across its rump It was not a switch it was a
section of broom handle which had been driven mto Mrs
McEachern s flower bed m front of the house for something
to grow on Though the horse was still going through the
motion of galloping, it was not movmg much faster than a
man could walk The stick too rose and fell with the same
spent and terrific slowness, the youth on the horse’s back
leaning forward as if he did not know that the horse had
flagged, or as though to lift forward and onward the fail-
ing beast whose slow hooves rang with a measured hollow
sound through the empty and moondappled street It — the



183

horse and the rider — had a strange, dreamy effect, like a
moving picture m slow motion as it galloped steady and
flagging up the street and toward the old comer where he
used to wait, less urgent perhaps but not less eager, and
more young

The horse was not even trotting now, on stiff legs, its
breathing deep and labored and rasping, each breath a
groan The stick still fell, as the progress of the horse
slowed, the speed of the stick increased in exact ratio But
the horse slowed, sheering mto the curb Joe pulled at its
head, beating it, but it slowed into the curb and stopped,
shadowdappled, its bead down, trembling, its breathing al-
most like a human voice Yet still the rider leaned forward
m the arrested saddle, in the attitude of temfic speed, beat-
ing the horse across the rump with the stick Save for the
rise and fall of the stick and the groaning respirations of
the animal, they might have been an equestrian statue
strayed from its pedestal and come to rest in an attitude of
ultimate exhaustion m a quiet and empty street splotched
and dappled by moonshadows

Joe descended He went to the horse's head and began
to tug it, as if he would drag it mto motion by mam strength
and then spring onto its back The horse did not move He
desisted, he seemed to be leaning a little toward the horse
Agam they were motionless the spent beast and the youth,
facing one another, their heads quite near, as if carved m an
attitude of listening or of prayer or of consultation Then Joe
raised the stick and fell to beating the horse about its
motionless head He beat it steadily until the stick broke He
continued to strike it with a fragment not much longer than
his hand But perhaps he realised that he was inflicting no
pain, or perhaps his arm grew bred at last, because he
threw the sbck away and turned, whirled, already in
full stride He did not look back Dimimshmg, bis white



184

start pulsing and fading in the moonshadows, he ran as
completely out of the life of the horse as if it had never
existed

He passed the comer where he used to wait If he no-
ticed, thought, at all, he must have said My God how long
How long ago that was The street curved into the gravel
road He had almost a mile yet to go, so he ran not fast but
carefully, steadily, his face lowered a little as if he contem-
plated the spurned load beneath his feet, his elbows at his
sides like a trained runner The road cmved on, moon-
blanched, bordered at wide intervals by die small, random,
new, terrible little houses m which people who came yes-
terday from nowhere and tomorrow will be gone wherenot,
dwell on the edges of towns They were all dark save the
one toward which he ran

He reached the house and turned from the road, run-
ning, his feet measured and loud m the late silence Perhaps
he could see already the waitress, m a dark dress for travel-
ling, with her hat on and her bag packed, waiting (How
they were to go anywhere, by what means depait, likely he
had never thought ) And perhaps Ma\ and Marne too, likely
undressed — Mac coatless or maybe even m his undershirt,
and Mame m the light blue kimono- — the two of them bus-
tling about m that loud, cheerful, seemg-someone-off way
But actually he was not thinking at all, since he had never
told the waitress to get ready to leave at all Perhaps he
believed that he had told her, or that she should know,
smce his recent doings and his future plans must have
seemed to him simple enough for anyone to understand
Perhaps he even believed that he had told her he was go-
ing home in order to get money when she got mto the car

He ran onto the porch Heretofore, even during his hey-
dey m the house, his impulse had been always to glide from
the road and mto the shadow of the porch and mto the
house itself where he was expected, as swiftly and mcon-



185

spicuously as possible He knocked There was a light m
her room, and another at the end of the hall, as he had
expected , and voices from beyond the curtained windows
too, several voices which he could discern to be intent
rather than cheerful that he expected too, thinking Per-
haps they think I am not coming That damn horse That
damn horse He knocked again, louder, putting his hand
on the knob, shaking it, pressing his face against the cur-
tained glass m the front door The voices ceased Then
there was no sound whatever from within the house The
two lights, the hghted shade to her room and the opaque
curtain m the door, burned with a steady and unwavering
glare, as if all the people in the house had suddenly died
when he touched the knob He knocked again, with scarce
interval between, he was still knocking when the door (no
shadow had fallen upon the curtam and no step had ap-
proached beyond it) fled suddenly and silently from under
his rapping hand He was already stepping across the
threshold as if he were attached to the door, when Max
emerged from behind it, blocking it He was completely
dressed, even to the hat “Well, well, well,” he said His
voice was not loud, and it was almost as if he had drawn
Joe swiftly into the hall and shut the door and locked it
before Joe knew that he was inside Yet his voice held again
that ambiguous quality, that quality hearty and completely
empty and completely without pleasure 01 mirth, like a
shell, like something he carried before his face and watched
Joe through it, which m the past had caused Joe to look
at Max with something between puzzlement and anger
“Here's Romeo at last,” he said “The Beale Street Playboy ”
Then he spoke a little louder, saying Romeo quite loud
“Come m and meet the folks ”

Joe was already moving toward the door which he knew
very neaily running again, if he had ever actually stopped
He was not listening to Max He had never heard of Beale



186

(Street, that three or four Memphis city blocks m compari-
son with winch Harlem is a movie set Joe had not looked
at anything Because suddenly he saw the blonde woman
standing m the hall at the rear He had not seen her emerge
mto the hall at all, yet it was empty when he entered And
then suddenly she was standing there She was dressed, in
a dark skirt, and she held a hat in her hand And just be-
yond an open dark door beside him was a pile of luggage,
several bags Perhaps he did not see them Or perhaps look-
ing saw once, faster than thought I didn’t think she would
have that many Perhaps he thought then for the first time
that they had nothing to travel in, thinking How can I
carry all those But he did not pause, already turning to-
ward the door which he knew It was only as he put his
hand on the door that he became aware of complete silence
beyond it, a silence which he at eighteen knew that it would
take more than one person to make But he did not pause,
perhaps he was not even aware that the hall was empty
again, that the blonde woman had vanished again without
his having seen or heard her move
He opened the door He was running now, that is, as a
man might run far ahead of himself and his knowing m the
act of stopping stock still The waitress sat on the bed as
he had seen her sitting so many times She wore the dark
dress and the hat, as he had expected, known She sat with
her face lowered, not even looking at the door when it
opened, a cigarette burning m one still hand that looked
almost monstrous in its immobility against the dark dress
And m the same instant he saw the second man He had
never seen the man before But he did not realise this now
It was only later that he remembered that, and remembered
the piled luggage m the dark room which he had looked at
for an instant while thought went faster than seemg
The stranger sat on the bed too, also smoking His hat



187

was tipped forward so that the shadow of the brim fell
across his mouth He was not old, yet he did not look young
either He and Max might have been brothers m the sense
that any two white men strayed suddenly into an African
village might look like brothers to them who live there
His face, his chm where the light fell upon it, was still
Whether or not the stranger was looking at him, Joe did
not know And that Max was standing just behind him Joe
did not know either And he heard their actual voices with-
out knowing what they said, without even liste nin g Ask
him

How would he know Perhaps he heard the words But
likely not Likely they were as yet no more significant than
the rasping of insects beyond the closedrawn window, or
the packed bags which he had looked at and had not yet
seen He cleared out right afterward, Bobbie said

He might know Let’s find out if we can just what toe are
running from, at least

Though Joe had not moved smce he entered, he was still
running When Max touched his shoulder he turned as if
he had been halted in midstride He had not been aware
that Max was even in the room He looked at Max over
his shoulder with a land of funous annoyance “Let’s have
it, kid,” Max said “What about it?”

“What about what?” Joe said

“The old guy Do you think you croaked him? Let’s have
it straight You dont want to get Bobbie m a jam ”

"Bobbie,” Joe said, thinking Bobbie Bobbie He turned,
running again, this time Max caught his shoulder, though
not hard

“Come on,” Max said “Amt we all fnends here? Did you
croak him?”

“Croak him?” Joe said, in that fretted tone of impatience
and restraint, as if he were being detained and questioned
by a child



188

The stranger spoke “The one you crowned with the
chan: Is he dead?”

“Dead?” Joe said He looked at the stranger When he
did so, he saw the waitress again and he ran again He actu-
ally moved now He had completely dismissed the two men
from his mind He went to the bed, dragging at his pocket,
on his face an expression both exalted and victorious The
waitress did not look at him She had not looked at him
once smce he entered, though very likely he had completely
forgot that She had not moved, the cigarette still burned
in her hand Her motionless hand looked as big and dead
and pale as a piece of cooking meat Again someone
grasped him by the shoulder It was the stranger now
The stranger and Max stood shouldei to shoulder, looking
at Joe

“Quit stalling,” the stranger said “If you croaked the guy,
say so It cant be any secret long They are bound to hear
about it by next month at the outside ”

“I dont know, I tell you!” Joe said He looked from one
to the other, fretted but not yet glaring “I hit him He fell
down I told him I was going to do it someday ” He looked
£rom one to the other of the still, almost identical faces He
began to jerk his shoulder under the strangers hand

Max spoke “What did you come here for, then? 1 ”

“What did — •” Joe said “What did I ” he said, m a
tone of fainting amazement, glaring from face to face with
£ sort of outraged yet still patient exasperation “What did
I come for? I came to get Bobbie Do you think that I —
when I went all the way home to get the money to get mar-
ried — ” Again he completely forgot, dismissed them He
jerked free and turned to the woman with once more that
expression oblivious, exalted, and proud Very likely at that
moment the two men were blown as completely out of his
life as two scraps of paper Very likely he was not even
aware when Max went to the door and called and a



189


moment later the blonde woman entered He was bending
above the bed upon which sat the immobile and down-
lookmg waitress, stooping above her, dragging the wadded
mass of corns and bills from his pocket, onto her lap and
onto the bed beside her “Here* Look at it Look Ive got
See?”

Then the wmd blew upon him again, like in the school
house thiee hours ago among the gaped faces there of
which he had for the time been oblivious He stood in a
quiet, dreamlike state, erect now where the upward spring
of the sitting waitress had knocked him, and saw her, on
her feet, gather up the wadded and scattered money and
fling it, he saw quietly her face strained, the mouth scream-
ing, the eyes screaming too He alone of them all seemed
to himself quiet, calm, his voice alone quiet enough to reg-
ister upon the ear “You mean you wont?” he said "You
mean, you wont?”

It was very much like it had been m the school house
someone holding her as she struggled and shrieked, her hair
wild with the jerking and tossmg of her head, her face, even
her mouth, m contrast to the hair as still as a dead mouth
m a dead face "Bastard* Son of a bitch* Getting me into a
jam, that always treated you like you were a white man A
white man!”

But very likely to him even yet it was just noise, not reg-
istering at all just a part of the long wind He just stared
at her, at the face which he had never seen before, saying
quietly (whether aloud or not, he could not have said) in
a slow amazement Why , I committed murder for her I
even stole for her as if he had just heard of it, thought of
it, been told that he had done it

Then she too seemed to blow out of his life on the long
wmd like a third scrap of paper He began to swing his
arm as if the hand still clutched the shattered chair The
blonde woman had been an the room some time He saw



190

her for the first time, without surprise, having apparently
materialised out of thm air, motionless, with that diamond-
surfaced tranquillity which invested her with a respecta-
bility as implacable and calm as the white lifted glove of a
policeman, not a hair out of place She now wore the pale
blue kimono over the dark garment for txavelhng She said
quietly “Take him Let’s get out of here There’ll be a cop
out here soon They’ll know where to look for him "

Perhaps Joe did not hear her at all, nor the screaming
waitress “He told me himself he was a nigger 1 The son of a
bitch* Me f — mg for nothing a nigger son of a bitch that
would get me in a jam with clodhopper police At a clod-
hopper dance *” Perhaps he heard only the long wind, as,
swinging his hand as though it still clutched the chair, he
sprang forward upon the two men Very likely he did not
even know that they were already moving toward him
Because with something of the exaltation of his adopted
father he sprang full and of his own accord into the
stranger s fist Perhaps he did not feel either blow, though
the stranger struck him twice in the face before he reached
the floor, where like the man whom he had struck down,
he lay upon his back, quite still But he was not out be-
cause his eyes were still open, looking quietly up at them
There was nothing m his eyes at all, no pam, no surprise
But apparently he could not move, he just lay there with
a profoundly contemplative expression, looking quietly up
at the two men, and the blonde woman still as immobile
and completely finished and surfaced as a cast statue Per-
haps he could not hear the voices either, or perhaps he did
and they once more had no more significance than the dry
buzzing of the steady insects beyond the window
Bttchmg up as meet a little setup as I could have wanted
He ought to stay away from bitches
He cant help himself He was born too close to one
Is he really a nigger? He dont look like one



191

That's what he told Bobbie one night But I guess she
still dont know any more about what he is than he does
These country bastards are liable to be anything
Well find out Well see if his blood is black Lying
peaceful and still Joe watched the stranger lean down and
lift Ins head from the floor and strike him agam in the face,
this time with a short slashing blow After a moment he
licked his lip a little, somewhat as a child might lick a cook-
ing spoon He watched the stranger’s hand go back But it
did not fall

That's enough Let's get on to Memphis
Just one more Joe lay quietly and watched the hand
Then Max was beside the stranger, sroopmg too Well need
a little more blood to tell for sure
Sure He dont need to worry This one is on the house
too

The hand did not fall Then the blonde woman was there
too She was holding the stranger’s lifted arm by the wrist.
I said that will do



10


KNOWING NOT GRIEVING REMEMBERS A THOUSAND SAVAGE

and lonely streets They run from that night when he lay
and heard the final footfall and then the final door (they
did not even turn the light out) and then lay quietly, on
his back, with open eyes while above the suspended globe
burned with aching and unwavering glare as though m the
house where all the people had died He did not know how
long he lay there He was not thinking at all, not suffering
Perhaps he was conscious of somewhere within him the two
severed wixeends of volition and sentience lying, not touch-
ing now, waiting to touch, to knit anew so that he could
move While they finished their preparations to depart they
stepped now and then across him, like people about to va-
cate a house forever will across some object which they
intend to leave Here bobbie here kid heres your comb you
forgot it heres romeos chicken feed too jesus he must have
tapped the Sunday school till on the way out its bobbies
now didnt you see him give it to her didnt you see old big-
hearted thats right pick it up kid you can keep it as an in-
stallment or a souvenir or something what dont she want 1 1
well say thats too bad now thats tough but we cant leave
it lay here on the floor ttU rot a hole m the floor tts already
192



193

helped to rot one hole pretty big for its size pretty big for
any size hey bobbie hey kid sure ill just keep it for bobbie
like hell you will well % mean ill keep half of it for bobbie
leave it there you bastards lohat do you want with it it be-
longs to him well for sweet jesus what does he want with it
he doesn’t use money he doesnt need it ask bobbie if he
needs money they give it to him that the rest of us have to
pay for it leave it there i said like hell this amt mine to
leave its hobbies it amt yours neither unless sweet jesus
youre going to tell me he owes you jack too that he has
been f — mg you too behind my back on credit i said leave
it go chase yourself it amt but five or six bucks apiece
Then the blonde woman stood above him and stooping, he
watching quietly, she lifted her skirt and took from the top
of her stocking a flat folded sheaf of banknotes and re-
moved one and stopped and thrust it into the fob pocket
of his trouseis Then she was gone get on get out of here
you amt ready yet yourself you got to put that kimono in
and close your bag and powder your face again bring my
bag and hat m here go on now and you take bobbie and
them other bags and get m the car and wait for me and man
you think im going to leave either one of you here alone to
steal that one off of him too go on now get out of here

Then they were gone the final feet, the final door Then
he heard the car drown the noise of the msects, riding
above, sinking to the level, sinking below the level so that
he heard only the msects He lay there beneath the light
He could not move yet, as he could look without actually
seeing, hear without actually knowing, the two wireends
not yet knit as he lay peacefully, licking his lips now and
then as a child does

Then the wireends knit and made connection He did not
know the exact instant, save that suddenly he was aware of
his ringing head, and he sat up slowly, discovering himself
agam, getting to his feet He was dizzy, the room went



194

round him, slowly and smoothly as thinking, so that think-
ing said Not yet But he still felt no pam, not even when,
propped before the bureau, he examined m the glass his
swollen and bloody face and touched his face “Sweet
Jesus,” he said “They sure beat me up ” He was not think-
ing yet, it had not yet risen that far I reckon I better get
out of here 1 reckon I better get out of here He went to-
ward the door, his hands out before him like a blind man
or a sleepwalker He was m the hall without having remem-
bered passing through the door, and he found himself m
another bedroom while he still hoped perhaps not believed
that he was moving toward the front door It was small
too Yet it still seemed to be filled with the presence of the
blonde woman, its very cramped harsh walls bulged out-
ward with that mxhtant and diamondsui faced respectabil-
ity On the bare bureau sat a pint bottle almost full of whis-
key He drank it, slowly, not feeling the fire at all, holdmg
himself upright by holdmg to the bureau The whiskey went
down his throat cold as molasses, without taste He set the
empty bottle down and leaned on the bureau, his head low-
ered, not thinking, waiting perhaps without knowing it,
perhaps not even waiting Then the whiskey began to burn
m him and he began to shake Ins head slowly from side to
side, while thinking became one with the slow, hot coiling
and recoilmg of his entrails T got to get out of here ’ He
re-entered the hall Now it was his head that was clear and
his body that would not behave He had to coax it along
the hall, sliding it along one wall toward the from, think-
ing, ‘Come on, now, pull yourself together I got to get out '
Thinking Jf I can just get it outside , into the air , the cool
air , the coot dark He watched his hands fumbling at the
door, trying to help them, to coax and control them ‘Any-
way, they didn't lock it on me,' he thought ‘Sweet Jesus,
I could not have got out until morning then It never would
have opened a window and chmbed through it 9 He opened



195

the door at last and passed out and closed the door behind
him, arguing again with his body which did not want to
bother to close the door, having to be forced to close it
upon the empty house where the two lights burned with
their dead and unwavering glare, not knowing that the
house was empty and not caring, not caring any more for
silence and desolation than they had cared for the cheap
and brutal nights of stale oftused glasses and stale oftused
beds His body was acquiescing better, becoming docile
He stepped from the dark porch, into the moonlight, and
with his bloody head and his empty stomach hot, savage,
and courageous with whiskey, he entered the street which
was to run for fifteen years

The whiskey died away m time and was renewed and
died again, but the street ran on From that night the thou
sand streets ran as one street, with imperceptible comers*
and changes of scene, broken by intervals of begged and
stolen ndes, on trams and trucks, and on country wagons
with he at twenty and tvventyfive and thirty sitting on the
seat with his still, hard face and the clothes (even when
soiled and worn) of a city man and the dnver of the wagon
not knowing who or what the passenger was and not daring
to ask The street ran mto Oklahoma and Missouri and as
far south as Mexico and then back north to Chicago and
Detroit and then back south again and at last to Mississippi
It was fifteen years long it ran between the savage and
spurious board fronts of oil towns where, his inevitable
serge clothing and light shoes black with bottomless mud,
he ate crude food from tin dishes that cost him ten and
fifteen dollars a meal and paid for them with a roll of bank-
notes the size of a bullfrog and stained too with the rich
xnud that seemed as bottomless as the gold which it ex
creted It ran through yellow wheat fields waving beneath
the fierce yellow days of labor and hard sleep m haystacks
beneath the cold mad moon of September, and the brittle



196

stars he was in turn laboier, miner, prospector, gambling
tout, he enlisted m the army, served four months and de-
serted and was never caught And always, sooner or later,
the street ran through cities, through an identical and well-
nigh interchangeable section of cities without remembered
names, wheie beneath the dark and equivocal and symbol-
ical archways of midnight he bedded with the women and
paid them when he had the money, and when he did not
have it he bedded anyway and then told them that he was
a Negro For a while it worked, that was while he was still
in the south It was quite simple, quite easy Usually all he
risked was a cursing from the woman and the matron of
the house, though now and then he was beaten unconscious
by other patrons, to waken later m the stieet or m the jail

That was while he was still m the ( comparatively speak-
ing) south Because one night it did not work He lose from
the bed and told the woman that he was a Negro “You are?”
she said “I thought maybe you were just another wop or
something ” She looked at him, without particular interest,
then she evidently saw something m his face she said,
“What about it? You look all right You ought to seen the
shine I turned out just before your turn came” She was
looking at him She was quite still now “Say, what do you
think this dump is, anyhow? The Ritz hotel?” Then she quit
talking She was watching his face and she began to move
backward slowly before him, staring at him, her face drain-
ing, her mouth open to scream Then she did scream It
took two policemen to subdue him At first they thought
that the woman was dead

He was sick after that He did not know until then that
there were white women who would take a man with c
black skin He stayed sick for two yeais Sometimes he
would remember how he had once tricked or teased while
men mto calling him a Negro m order to fight them, to beat
them or be beaten, now he fought the Negro who called



197

him white. He was in the north now, an Chicago and then
Detroit He lived with Negroes, shunning white people* He
ate with them, slept with them, belligerent, unpredictable,
uncommunicative He now lived as man and wife with a
woman who resembled an ebony carving At night he
would lie m bed beside her, sleepless, beginning to breathe
deep and hard He would do it deliberately, feeling, even
watching, his white chest arch deeper and deeper within
his ribcage, trying to breathe mto himself the dark odor,
the dark and inscrutable thinking and being of Negroes,
with each suspiration trying to expel from himself the white
blood and the white thinking and bemg And all the while
his nostrils at the odor which he was trying to make his own
would whiten and tauten, his whole bemg writhe and strain
with physical outrage and spiritual denial
He thought that it was loneliness which he was trying to
escape and not himself But the street ran on catlike, one
place was the same as another to him But m none of them
could he be qmet But the street ran on in its moods and
phases, always empty he might have seen himself as in
numberless avatars, in silence, doomed with motion, driven
by the courage of flagged and spurred despair, by the de-
spair of courage whose opportunities had to be flagged and
spurred He was thirtythree years old
One afternoon the street had become a Mississippi coun-
try road He had been put off a southbound freight tram
near a small town He did not know the name of the town,
he didn’t care what word it used for name He didn’t even
see it, anyway He skirted it, following the woods, and came
to the road and looked in both directions It was not a graw
elled road, though it looked to be fairly well used He saw
several Negro cabins scattered here and there along it, then
he saw, about a half mile away, a larger house It was a big
house set in a grove of trees, obviously a place of some pre-
tensions at one tame But now the trees needed pruning and



198

the house had not been painted in years But he could tell
that it was inhabited, and he had not eaten m twentyfour
hours 'That one might do/ he thought

But he did not approach it at once, though the afternoon
was drawing on Instead he turned his back upon it and
went on m the other direction, m his soiled white shirt and
worn serge trousers and his cracked, dusty, townshaped
shoes, his cloth cap set at an arrogant angle above a three-
day’s stubble Yet even then he did not look like a tramp,
at least apparently not to the Negro boy whom he met pres-
ently coming up the road and swinging a tin bucket He
stopped the boy “Who lives m the big house back there?”
he said

“That where Miz Burden stay at ”

“Mr and Mrs Burden?”

“No, sir Amt no Mr Burden Amt nobody live there but
her”

“Oh An old woman, I guess ”

“No, sir Miz Burden amt old Amt young neither ”

“And she lives there by herself Dont she get scared?”

“Who going to harm her, right here at town? Colored
folks around here looks after her ”

“Colored folks look after her?”

At once it was as if the boy bad closed a door between
himself and the man who questioned him “I reckon amt
nobody round here going to do her no harm She amt
harmed nobody ”

“I guess not,” Chnstmas said “How far is it to the next
town over this way?”

“ ’Bout thirty miles, they say You amt fixing to walk it,
is you?”

“No,” Christmas said He turned then, going on The boy
looked after him Then he too turned, walking again, the
tm bucket swinging against his faded flank A few steps
later he looked back The man who had questioned him



199

was walking on, steadily though not fast The boy went on
again, in his faded, patched, scant overalls He was bare-
foot Presently he began to shuffle, still moving forward,
the red dust rising about his lean, chocolatecolored shanks
and the frayed legs of the too short overalls, he began to
chant, tuneless, rhjthmic, musical, though on a single note

Say dont didn't
Didn't dont who
Want dat yaller gal's
Pudden dont hide

Lying in a tangle of shrubbery a hundred yards from the
house, Christmas heard a far clock stake nine and then ten
Before him the house bulked square and huge from its mass
of trees There was a light m one window upstairs The
shades were not drawn and he could see that the light was
a kerosene lamp, and now and then he saw through the
window the shadow of a moving person cross the farther
wall But he never saw the person at all After a while the
light went out

The house was now dark, he quit watching it then He
lay m the copse, on his belly on the dark earth In the copse
the darkness was impenetrable, through his shirt and trou-
sers it felt a little chill, close, famtly dank, as if the sun never
reached the atmosphere which the copse held He could feel
the neversunned earth strike, slow and receptive, against
him through his clothes groin, hip, belly, breast, forearms
His arms were crossed, his forehead rested upon them, in
his nostrils the damp rich odor of the dark and fecund
earth

He did not look once agam toward the dark house He
lay perfectly still in the copse for more than an hour before
he rose up and emerged He did not creep There was noth
ing skulking nor even especially careful about his approach



200

to the house He simply went quietly as if that were his
natural manner of moving and passed around the now
dimensionless bulk of the house, toward the rear, wheie the
kitchen would be He made no more noise than a cat as he
paused and stood for a while beneath the window where
the light had shown In the grass about his feet the crick-
ets, which had ceased as he moved, keeping a little island
of silence about him like thm yellow shadow of their small
\oices, began again, ceasing again when he moved with
that toy and aleit suddenness From the rear of the house
a single stoiey wing projected "That will be the kitchen/ he
thought Yes That will be it* He walked without sound,
moving m his toy island of abruptly ceased insects He
could discern a door m the kitchen wall He would have
found it unlocked if he had tried it But he did not He
passed it and paused beneath a window Before he tried it
he remembered that he had seen no screen m the lighted
window upstairs

The window was even open, piopped open with a stick
What do you think about that/ he thought He stood be-
side the window, his hands on the sill, breathing quietly,
not listening, not hurrying, as if there were no need for
haste anywhere under the sun 'Well Well Well What do
you know about that Well Well Well 9 Then he climbed
into the window, he seemed to flow into the dark kitchen
a shadow returning without a sound and without locomo-
tion to the allmother of obscurity and darkness Perhaps he
thought of that other window which he had used to use
and of the rope upon which he had had to rely, perhaps
not

Very likely not, no more than a cat would recall another
window, like the cat, he also seemed to see m the darkness
as he moved as unerringly toward the food which he
wanted as if he knew where it would be, that, or were be-
ing manipulated by an agent which did know He ate some-



201

thing from an invisible dish, with invisible fingers invisible
food He did not care what it would be He did not know
that he had even wondered or tasted until his jaw stopped
suddenly m midchewing and thinking fled for twentyfive
years back down the street, past all the imperceptible cor-
ners of bitter defeats and more bitter victories, and five
miles even beyond a comer where he used to wait m the
terrible early time of love, for someone whose name he had
forgot, five miles even beyond that it went Til know it m a
minute I have eaten it before , somewhere In a minute I
will memory clicking knowing I see I see I more than
see hear I hear I see my head bent I hear the monot-
onous dogmatic voice which 1 believe will never cease
going on and on forever and peeping I see the indomitable
bullet head the clean blunt beard they too bent and I think-
ing How can he be so nothungry and I smelling my mouth
and tongue weeping the hot salt of waiting my eyes tasting
the hot steam from the dish “It’s peas/ 7 he said, aloud
"For sweet Jesus Field peas cooked with molasses 77
More of him than thinking may have been absent, he
should have heard the sound before he did, since whoever
was creating it was trying no more for silence and caution
than he had Perhaps he did hear it But he did not move
at all as the soft sound of slippered feet approached the
kitchen from the house side of it, and when he did at last
turn suddenly, his eyes glowing suddenly, he saw already
beneath the door winch entered the house itself, the fault
approaching light The open window was at his hand he
could have been through it in a single step almost But he
did not move He chdn t even set down the dish He did not
even cease to chew Thus he was standmg m the center of
the room, holding the dish and chewing, when the door
opened and the woman entered She wore a faded dressing
gown and she earned a candle, holding it high, so that its
fight fell upon her face a face quiet, grave, utterly un-



202

alarmed In the soft light of the candle she looked to be
not much past thirty She stood m the door They looked
at one another for more than a minute, almost m the same
attitude he with the dish, she with the candle He had
stopped chewing now

“If it is fust food you want, you will find that,” she said
in a voice calm, a little deep, quite cold



11


BY THE LIGHT OF THE CANDLE SHE DID NOT LOOK MUCH MOKE

than thirty, m the soft light downfalling upon the softun-
girdled presence of a woman prepared for sleep When he
saw her by daylight he knew that she was better than
thirtyfive Later she told him that she was forty Which
means either fortyone or fortynme, from the way she said
Jt/ he thought But it was not that first night, nor for many
succeeding ones, that she told him that much even

She told him very little, anyway They talked very little,
and that casually, even after he was the lover of her spin-
sters bed Sometimes he could almost believe that they did
not talk at all, that he didn't know her at all It was as
though there were two people the one whom he saw now
and then by day and looked at while they spoke to one an-
other with speech that told nothing at all since it didn't try
to and didn’t intend to, the other with whom he lay at night
and didn't even see, speak to, at all
Even after a year (he was working at the planing mill
now) when he saw her by day at all, it would be on Satur-
day afternoon or Sunday or when be would come to the
house for the food which she would prepare for him and
leave upon the kitchen table Now and then she would

203



204

come to the kitchen, though she would never stay while he
ate, and at times she met him at the hack porch, where dur-
ing the first four or five months of his residence m the cabin
below the house, they would stand for a while and talk al-
most like strangers They always stood she m one of her
apparently endless succession of clean calico house dresses
and sometimes a cloth sunbonnet like a countrywoman,
and he m a clean white shut now and the serge tiousers
creased now every week They never sat down to talk He
had never seen her sitting save one time when he looked
through a downstairs window and saw hei wilting at a desk
in the room And it was a year after he had remarked with-
out curiosity the volume of mail which she received and
sent, and that for a certain period of each forenoon she
would sit at the worn, scarred, rolltop desk m one of the
scarceused and sparsely furnished downstairs 100ms, writ-
ing steadily, before he learned that what she received were
business and private documents with fifty different post-
marks and what she sent were replies — advice, busmess,
financial and religious, to the presidents and faculties and
trustees, and advice personal and practical to young girl
students and even alumnse, of a dozen Negio schools and
colleges through the south Now and then she would be ab-
sent from home three and four days at a time, and though
he could now see her at his will on any night, it was a year
before he learned that m these absences she visited the
schools m person and talked to the teachers and the stu-
dents Her busmess affairs were conducted by a Negro law-
yer m Memphis, who was a trustee of one of the schools,
and m whose safe, along with her will, reposed the written
instructions (m her own hand) for the disposal of her body
after death When he learned that, he understood the town's
attitude toward her, though he knew that the town did not
know as much as he did He said to himself "Then I wont
be bothered here/



205

One day he realised that she had never invited him hk
side the house proper He had never been further than the
kitchen, which he had already entered of his own accord,
thinking, hphfted, ‘She couldn’t keep me out of here I
guess she knows that’ And he had never entered the
kitchen by day save when he came to get the food which
she prepared for him and set out upon the table And when
he entered the house at night it was as he had entered it
the first night, he felt like a thief, a robber, even while he
mounted to the bedroom where she waited Even after a
year it was as though he entered by stealth to despoil her
virginity each time anew It was as though each turn of
dark saw him faced again with the necessity to despoil
agam that which he had already despoiled — or never had
and never would

Sometimes he thought of it m that way, remembermg
the hard, untearful and unselfpitymg and almost manlike
yieldmg of that surrender A spiritual privacy so long
intact that its own instinct for preservation had immolated
it, its physical phase the strength and fortitude of a man
A dual personality the one die woman at first sight of
whom m the lifted candle (or perhaps the very sound of
the slippered approaching feet) there had opened before
him, instantaneous as a landscape m a lightmngflash, a
horizon of physical security and adultery if not pleasure,
the other the mantrained muscles and the mantrained habit
of thinking born of heritage and environment with which
he had to fight up to the final instant There was no femi
nine vacillation, no coyness of obvious desire and intention,
to succumb at last It was as if he struggled physically with
another man for an object of no actual value to either, and
for which they struggled on principle alone

When he saw her next, he thought, ‘My God How little
I know about women, when I thought I knew so much *
It was on the very next day, looking at her, being spoken



206

to by her, it was as though what memoiy of less than
twelve hours knew to be true could never have happened,
thinking Under her clothes she cant even be made so
that it could have happened He had not started to work
at the mill then Most of that day he spent lying on his back
on the cot which she had loaned him, m the cabin which
she had given him to live m, smoking, his hands beneath
his head "My God/ he thought, "it was like I was the
woman and she was the man J But that was not right,
either Because she had resisted to the very last But it
was not woman xesistance, that resistance which, if really
meant, cannot be overcome by any man for the reason
that the woman observes no rules of physical combat But
she had resisted fair, by the rules that decreed that upon a
certain crisis one was defeated, whether the end of resistance
had come or not That night he waited until he saw the
light go out in the kitchen and then come on m her room
He went to the house He did not go m eagerness, but m a
quiet rage "Til show her,” he said aloud He did not try
to be quiet He entered the house boldly and mounted the
stairs, she heard him at once '"Who is it?” she said But
there was no alarm m her tone He didn't answer He
mounted the stairs and entered the room She was still
dressed, turning, watching the door as he entered But she
did not speak to him She just watched him as he went to
the table and blew out the lamp, thinking, 'Now shell run’
And so he sprang forward, toward the door to intercept
her But she did not flee He found her m the dark exactly
where the light had lost her, in the same attitude He be-
gan to tear at her clothes He was talking to her, in a tense,
hard, low voice "111 show you! Ill show the bitch!” She
did not resist at all It was almost as though she were help-
ing him, with small changes of position of limbs when the
ultimate need for help arose But beneath his hands the
body might have been the body of a dead woman not yet



207

stiffened But lie did not desist, though his hands were
hard and urgent it was with rage alone “At least I have
made a woman of her at last,’ he thought ‘Now she hates
me I have taught her that, at least ’

The next day he lay again all day long on his cot in
the cabin He ate nothing, he did not even go to the kitchen
to see if she had left food for him He was waiting for
sunset, dusk ‘Then I’ll blow,’ he thought He did not ex-
pect ever to see her agam ‘Better blow,’ he thought ‘Not
give her the chance to turn me out of the cabin too That
much, anyway No white woman ever did that Only a
nigger woman ever give me the air, turned me out’ So
he lay on the cot, smoking, waiting for sunset Through
the open door he watched the sun slant and lengthen and
turn copper Then the copper faded into Mac, into the fad-
ing lilac of full dusk He could hear the frogs then, and
fireflies began to drift across the open frame of the door,
growing brighter as the dusk faded Then he rose He
owned nothing but the razor, when he had put that into
his pocket, he was ready to travel one mile or a thousand,
wherever the street of the imperceptible comers should
choose to run agam Yet when he moved, it was toward
the house It was as though, as soon as he found that his
feet intended to go there, that he let go, seemed to float,
surrendered, thinking All right All right floating, nding
across the dusk, up to the house and onto the back porch
and to the door by which he would enter, that was never
locked But when he put his hand upon it, it would not
open Perhaps for the moment neither hand nor believing
would believe, he seemed to stand there, quiet, not yet
thinkin g, watching his hand shaking the door, hearmg the
sound of the bolt on the mside He turned away quietly
He was not yet raging He went to the kitchen door He
expected that to be locked also But he did not realise until
he found that it was open, that he had v anted it to be



208

When he found that it was not looked it was like an insult
It was as though some enemy upon whom he had wreaked
his utmost of violence and contumely stood, unscathed and
unscarred, and contemplated him with a musing and in-
sufferable contempt When he entered the kitchen, he did
not approach the door into the house proper, the door in
which she had appeared with the candle on the night
when he first saw her He went directly to the table where
she set out his food He did not need to see His hands saw,
the dishes were still a little warm, thinking Set out for the
rugger For the nigger

He seemed to watch his hand as if from a distance He
watched it pick up a dish and swing it up and back and
hold it there while he breathed deep and slow, intensely
cogitant He heard his voice say aloud, as if he were play-
ing a game “Ham/" and watched Ins hand swing and
hurl the dish crashing mto the wall, the invisible wall,
waiting foi the crash to subside and silence to flow com-
pletely back before taking up another one He held this
dish poised, sniffing This one required some time "Beans
or greens?” he said "Beans or spinach? All right Call
it beans ” He hurled it, hard, waiting until the crash ceased
He raised the third dish "Something with onions,” he said,
thinking This is fun Why didnt I think of this before ?
'"Woman s muck ” He hurled it, hard and slow, hearing the
crash, waiting Now he heard something else feet within
the house, approaching the door "Shell have the lamp this
time/ he thought thinking If I were to look now , I could
see the light under the door As his hand swung up and
back Now she has almost reached the door "Potatoes,” he
said at last, with judicial finality He did not look around,
even when he heard the holt m the door and heard the door
myawn and light fell upon him where he stood with the
dish poised "Yes, it’s potatoes,” he said, m the preoccupied
and oblivious tone of a child playing alone He could both



£09

see and hear this crash Then the light went away, again he
heard the door yawn, again he heard the bolt He had not
yet looked around He took up the next dish “Beets/ he
said “I dont like beets, anyhow ”

The next day he went to work at the planing mill He
went to work on Friday He had eaten nothing now since
Wednesday night He drew no pay until Saturday evening,
working overtime Saturday afternoon He ate Saturday
night, in a restaurant downtown, for the first time in three
days He did not return to the house For a time he would
not even look toward it when he left or entered the cabin
At the end of six months he had worn a private path be-
tween the cabin and the mill It ran almost stimgstiaight,
avoidmg all houses, entering the woods soon and running
straight and with daily increasing definition and precision,
to the sawdust pile where he worked And always, when
the whistle blew at five thirty, he returned by it to the
cabin, to change into the white shirt and the dark creased
trousers before walking the two miles back to town to eat,
as if he were ashamed of the overalls Or perhaps it was
not shame, though very likely he could no more have
said what it was than he could have said that it was not
shame

He no longer deliberately avoided looking at the house,
neither did he deliberately look at it For a while he be-
lieved that she would send for him "She’ll make the first
sign/ he thought But she did not, after a while he believed
that he no longer expected it Yet on the first time that
he deliberately looked again toward the house, he felt a
shocking surge and fall of blood, then he knew that he
had been afraid all the time that she would be in sight, that
she had been watching him all the while with that per-
spicuous and still contempt, he felt a sensation of sweating,
of having surmounted an ordeal "That’s over/ he thought
I have done that now ’ So that when one day he did see



210

her, there was no shock Perhaps he was prepared Anyway,
there was no shocking surge and drop of blood when he
looked up, completely by chance, and saw her in the back
yard, m a gray dress and the sunbonnet He could not tell
if she had been watching him or had seen him or were
watching him now or not ‘You dont bother me and I
dont bother you/ he thought, thinking I dreamed it It
didn't happen She has nothing under her clothes so that
it could have happened

He went to work m the spring One evening m Septem-
ber he returned home and entered the cabin and stopped
m midstride, m complete astonishment She was sitting on
the cot, looking at him Her head was bare He had never
seen it bare before, though he had felt m the dark the loose
abandon of her hair, not yet wild, on a dark pillow But
he had never seen her hair before and he stood staring at
it alone while she watched him, he said suddenly to him-
self, in the instant of moving again 'Shes trying to I had
expected it to have gray m it She’s trying to be a woman
and she dont know how ’ Thinking, knowing She has come
to talk to me Two hours later she was still talking, they
sitting side by side on the cot m the now dark cabin She
told him that she was fortyone years old and that she had
been born m the house yonder and had lived there ever
since That she had never been away from Jefferson for a
longer period than six months at any time and these only
at wide intervals filled with homesickness for the sheer
boards and nails, the earth and trees and shrubs, which
composed the place which was a foreign land to her and
her people, when she spoke even now, after forty years,
among the slurred consonants and the flat vowels of the
land where her life had been cast, New England talked as
plainly as it did m the speech of her km who had never
left New Hampshire and whom she had seen perhaps three
times m her life, her forty years Sitting beside her on the



211

dark cot while the light failed and at last her voice was
without source, steady, interminable, pitched almost like the
voice of a man, Christmas thought, "She is like all the rest
of them Whether they are seventeen or fortyseven, when
they finally come to surrender completely, its going to be m
words ?

Calvin Burden was the son of a minister named
Nathaniel Burlington The youngest of ten children, he ran
away from home at the age of twelve, before he could write
hzs name (or would wiite it, his father believed) on a ship
He made the voyage around the Horn to California and
turned Catholic, he lived for a year m a monastery len
years later he reached Missouri from the west Three weeks
after he arrived he was married, to the daughter of a family
of Huguenot stock which had emigrated from Carolina by
way of Kentucky On the day after the wedding he said,
‘1 sruess I had better settle down ” He began chat day to
settle down The weddmg celebration was still m progress,
and his first step was to formally deny allegiance to the
Catholic church He did this m a saloon, insisting that every
one present listen to him and state their objections, he was
a little msistent on there being objections, though there
were none, not, that is, up to the time when he was led
away by friends The next day he said that he meant it,
anyhow, that he would not belong to a church full of frog-
eatmg slaveholders That was m Samt Louis He bought a
home there, and a year later he was a father He said then
that he had demed the Catholic church a year ago for the
sake of his son’s soul, almost as soon as the boy was born,
he set about to imbue the child with the religion of his New
England forebears There was no Unitarian meetinghouse
available, and Burden could not read the English Bible
But he had learned to read m Spanish from the priests in
California, and as soon as the child could walk Burden (he
pronounced it Barden now, since he could not spell it at all



212

and the priests had taught him to write it laboriously sc
with a hand moie apt for a rope 01 a ganbutt or a krnfe than
a pen) began to read to the child m Spanish from the book
which he had brought with him from California, interspers-
ing tlie fine, sonorous flowing of mysticism m a foreign
tongue with haish, extemporised dissertations composed
half of the bleak and bloodless logic which he remembered
from his fathei on interminable New England Sundays, and
half of immediate hellfire and tangible brimstone of which
any country Methodist circuit lider would have been proud
The two of them would be alone m the room the tall,
gaunt, Nordic man, and the small, dark, vivid child who
had inherited his mother’s build and coloring, like people
of two different races When the boy was about five, Burden
killed a man m an argument over slavery and had to take
his family and move, leave Samt Louis He moved west-
ward, “to get away from Democrats,” he said

The settlement to which he moved consisted of a store,
a blacksmith shop, a church and two saloons Here Bur-
den spent much of his time talking politics and m his harsh
loud voice cursing slavery and slaveholders His reputa-
tion had come with him and he was known to carry a
pistol, and his opmions weie received without comment, at
least At times, especially on Saturday nights, he came home,
still full of straight whiskey and the sound of his own
ranting Then he would wake his son (the mother was
dead now and there were three daughters, all with blue
eyes ) with fas hard hand “111 learn you to hate two things/ 5 '
he would say, “or 111 frail the tar out of you And those
things are hell and slaveholders Do you hear me?”

“Yes,” the boy would saj “I cant help but hear you Get
on to bed and let me sleep ”

He was no proselyter, missionary Save foi an occasional
minor episode with pistols, none of which lesulted fatally,
he confined himself to his own blood “Let them all go to



21S

their own benighted hell,” he said to his children “But 111
beat the loving God into the four of you as long as I can
raise my arm” That would be on Sunday, each Sunday
when, washed and clean, the children in calico or denim,
the father in his broadcloth froekcoat bulging over the
pistol m his hip pocket, and the collarless plaited shirt which
the oldest girl laundered each Saturday as well as the dead
mother ever had, they gathered in the clean crude parlor
while Burden read from the once gilt and blazoned book
in that language which none of them understood He con-
tinued to do that up to the time when his son ran away
fiom home

The son's name was Nathaniel He ran way at four-
teen and did not return for sixteen years, though they heard
from him twice m that time by word-of-mouth messenger
The first time was from Colorado, the second time from
Old Mexico He did not say what he was doing m either
place “He was all right when I left him,” the messenger
said This was the second messenger, it was m 1863, and
the messenger was eating breakfast in the kitchen, bolting
his food with decorous celerity The three girls, the two
oldest almost grown now, were serving him, standing with
airested dishes and softly open mouths in their full, coarse*
clean dresses, about the crude table, the father sitting oppo-
site the messenger across the table, his head propped on his
single hand The other arm he had lost two years ago while
a member of a troop of partisan guerrilla horse m the Kansas
fighting, and his head and beard were grizzled now But he
was still vigorous, and his froekcoat still bulged behind over
the butt of the heavy pistol “He got into a little trouble,”
the messenger said “But he was still all right the last I
heard”

“Trouble?” the father said

"He killed a Mexican that claimed he stole his horse
You know how them Spanish are about white men, even



214

when they dont kill Mexicans ” The messenger drank some
coffee “But I reckon they have to be land of strict, with
the country filling up with tenderfeet and all — Thank you
kindly,” he said, as the oldest girl slid a fresh stack of corn
cakes onto Ins plate, “yessum, I can reach the sweetening
fine — Folks claim it wasn’t the Mexicans horse noways
Claim the Mexican never owned no horse But I reckon
even them Spanish have got to be strict, with these East-
erners already giving the West such a bad name”

The father grunted "111 be bound If there was trouble
there, 111 be bound he was m it You tell him,” he said vio-
lently, “if he lets them yellowbellied priests bamboozle him,
111 shoot him myself quick as I would a Reb ”

“You tell him to come on back home” the oldest
girl said “That’s what you tell him ”

“Yes sum,” the messenger said “111 shore tell him I’m go-
ing east to Indianny for a spell But I’ll see him soon as I
get back I’ll shore tell him Oh, yes, I nigh forgot He said
to tell you the woman and kid was fine ”

“Whose woman and kid?” the father said
“His,” the messenger said “I thank you kindly again
And good-bye all”

They heard from the son a third time before they saw
him again They heard him shouting one day out xn front
of the house, though still some distance away It was m
1866 The family had moved again, a hundred miles far-
ther west, and it had taken the son two months to find them,
nding hack and forth across Kansas and Missouri m a
buckboard with two leather sacks of gold dust and minted
coins and crude jewels thrown under the seat like a pair of
old shoes, before he found the sod cabin and drove up to it,
shouting Sitting m a chair before the cabin door was a
man “There’s father,” Nathaniel said to the woman on the
buckboard seat beside him “See?” Though the father was
only m his late fifties, his sight had begun to fail He did



215

not distinguish his son’s face until the buckboard had
stopped and the sisters had billowed shrieking through the
door Then Calvin rose, he gave a long, booming shout.
'Well,” Nathaniel said, 'here we are ”

Calvin was not speaking sentences at all He was just
yelling, cursing Tm going to frail the tar out of you!” he
roared “Girls* Vangie! Beck! Sarah!* The sisters had already
emerged They seemed to boil through the door in their
full skirts like balloons on a torrent, with shrill cnes, above
which the father s voice boomed and roared His coat — the
frockcoat of Sunday or the wealthy or the retired — was
open now and he was tugging at something near his waist
with the same gesture and attitude with which he might
be drawing the pistol But he was merely dragging from
about his waist with his single hand a leather strap, and
flourishing it he now thrust and shoved through the shrill
and birdlike hovering of the women ‘Til learn you yet*”
he roared “I’ll learn you to run away!” The strap fell
twice across Nathaniel's shoulders It fell twice before the
two men locked

It was m play, m a sense a land of deadly play and
smiling seriousness the play of two lions that might or
might not leave marks They locked, the strap arrested'
face to face and breast to breast they stood the old man
with his gaunt, grizzled face and his pale New England
eyes, and the young one who bore no resemblance to him
at all, with his beaked nose and his white teeth smiling.
"Stop it,” Nathaniel said “Dont you see who’s watching
yonder m the buckboard?”

They had none of them looked at the buckboard until
now Sitting on the seat was a woman and a boy of about
twelve The father looked once at the woman, he did
not even need to see the boy He just looked at the woman,
his jaw slacked as if he had seen a ghost “Evangeline!” he
said She looked enough like his dead wife to have been hej



216


sister The boy who could hardly remember his mother at
all, had taken for wife a woman who looked almost exactly
like her

“That’s Juana/’ he said “That’s Calvin with her We
come home to get married”

After supper that night, with the woman and child m
bed, Nathaniel told them They sat about the lamp the
father, the sisters, the leturned son There were no min-
isters out there where he had been, he explained, just
priests and Catholics “So when we found that the chico was
on the way, she begun to talk about a priest But I wasn’t
going to have any Burden bom a heathen So I begun to
look around, to humor her But first one thing and then
another come up and I couldn’t get away to meet a minister,
and then the boy came and so it wasn’t any msh any more
But she kept on worrying, about priests and such, and so
in a couple of years I heard how there was to be a
wlnte minister m Santa Fe on a certain day So we packed
up and started out and got to Santa Fe just in time to see
the dust of the stage that was carrying the minister on
away So we -waited thexe and m a couple more years we
had anothei chance, m Texas Only tins time I got kmd of
mixed up with helping some Rangers that were cleaning
up some kind of a mess where some folks had a deputy
treed m a dance hall So when that was over we just de-
cided to come on home and get mamed right And here we
are”

The father sat, gaunt, grizzled, and austere, beneath the
lamp He had been listening, but his expression was brood-
ing, with a kmd of violently slumbering contemplativeness
and bewildered outrage “Another damn black Burden,”
he said “Folks will think I bred to a damn slaver And
now be’s got to breed to one, too ” The son listened quietly,
not even attempting to tell his father that the woman was
Spanish and not Rebel “Damn, lowbuilt black folks low



217

built because of the weight of the wrath of God, black be-
cause of the sm of human bondage staining their blood
and flesh ” His gaze was vague, fanatical, and convinced
“But we done freed them now, both black and white alike
They’ll bleach out now In a hundred years they will be
white folks again Then maybe well let them come back
into America ” He mused, smoldering, immobile “By God/’
he said suddenly, "he’s got a man’s build, anyway, for all
his black look By God, he’s going to be as big a man as his
grandpappy, not a runt like his pa For all his black clam
and his black look, he will ”

She told Christmas this while they sat on the cot in the
daikemng cabin They had not moved for over an hour
He could not see her face at all now, he seemed to swing
famtly, as though m a drifting boat, upon the sound of
her voice as upon some immeasurable and drowsing peace
evocative of nothing of any moment, scarce listening “His
name was Calvin, like grandpas, and he was as big as
grandpa, even if he was dark like father s mother’s people
and hke his mother She was not my mother he was just
my halfbrother Grandpa was the last of ten, and father was
the last of two, and Calvm was the last of all * He had just
turned twenty when he was killed m the town two miles
away by an ex-slaveholder and Confederate soldier named
Sartons, over a question of Negro voting

She told Christmas about the graves — the brother s, the
grandfather’s, the father’s and his two wives — on a cedar
knoll m the pasture a half mile from the house, listening
quietly, Christmas thought Ah She’ll take me to see them
I will have to go ’ But she did not She never mentioned
the graves to him again after that mght when she told him
where they were and that he could go and see them for
himself if he wished “You probably cant find them, any-
way,” she said “Because when they brought grandfather
and Calvm home that evening, father waited until after



218

dark and buried them and hid the graves, levelled the
mounds and put brush and things over them ”

"Hid them?” Christmas said

There was nothing soft, feminine, mournful and retro-
spective m her voice "So they would not find them Dig
them up Maybe butcher them ” She went on, her voice
a little impatient, explanatory "They hated us here We
were Yankees Foreigners Worse than foreigners enemies
Carpetbaggers And it — the War — still too close for even
the ones that got whipped to be very sensible Stirring up
the Negroes to murder and rape, they called it Threat-
ening white supremacy So I suppose that Colonel Sartoris
was a town hero because he lulled with two shots from
the same pistol an old onearmed man and a hoy who had
never even cast his first vote Maybe they were right I dont
know”

"Oh,” Christmas said "They might have done that? dug
them up after they were already killed, dead? Just when
do men that have different blood m them stop hating one
another?”

"When do they?” Her voice ceased She went on "I
dont know I dont know whether they would have dug
them up or not I wasn’t alive then I was not born until
fourteen years after Calvin was killed I dont know what
men might have done then But father thought they might
have So he hid the graves And then Calvin’s mother died
and he buried her there, with Calvin and grandpa And so
it sort of got to be our burying ground before we knew it
Maybe father hadn’t planned to bury her there* I remem-
ber how my mother (father sent for her up to New
Hampshire where some of our km people still live, soon
after Calvins mother died He was alone here, you see
I suppose if it hadn’t been for Calvin and grandpa buried
out yonder, he would have gone away) told me that father
started once to move away, when Calvins mother died



219

But she died m the summer, and it would have been too
hot then to take her back to Mexico, to her people So he
buried her here Maybe that’s why he decided to stay
here Or maybe it was because he was getting old too then,
and all the men who had fought in the War were getting
old and the Negroes hadn’t raped or murdered anybody to
speak of Anyway, he buried her here He had to hide that
grave too, because he thought that someone might see it and
happen to remember Calvin and grandfather He couldn’t
take the risk, even if it was all over and past and done then
And the next year he wrote to our cousin m New Hampshire
He said, 1 am fifty years old I have all she will ever need
Send me a good woman for a wife I dont care who she is,
just so she is a good housekeeper and is at least thirtyfive
years old ’ He sent the railroad fare m the letter Two months
later my mother got here and they were married that day
That was quick marrying, for him The other time it took
him over twelve years to get married, that time back in Kan-
sas when he and Calvin and Calvin’s mother finally caught
up with grandfather They got home in the middle of the
week, but they waited until Sunday to have the weddmg
They had it outdoors, down by the creek, with a barbecued
steer and a keg of whiskey and everybody that they could
get word to or that heard about it, came They began to
get there Saturday morning, and on Saturday night the
preacher came All that day father’s sisters worked, making
Calvin’s mother a weddmg gown and a veil They made
the gown out of flour sacks and the veil out of some
mosquito netting that a saloon keeper had nailed over a
picture behind the bar They borrowed it from him They
even made some kind of a suit for Calvin to wear He was
twelve then, and they Wanted him to be the rmgbearer He
didn’t want to He found out the mght before what they
intended to make him do, and the next day (they had in-
tended to have the weddmg about six or seven o’clock the



220

next morning) after everybody had got up and eaten break-
fast, they had to put off the ceremony until they could find
Calvin At last they found him and made him put on the
suit and they had the wedding, with Calvins mother m
the homemade gown and the mosquito veil and father with
his hair slicked with bears grease and the carved Spanish
boots he had brought back from Mexico Grandfather gave
the bride away Only he had been going back to the keg
of whiskey every now and then while they were hunting
for Calvin, and so when his time came to give the bnde
away he made a speech instead He got off on Lincoln and
slavery and dared any man there to deny that Lincoln and
the Negro and Moses and the children of Israel were the
same, and that the Red Sea was just the blood that had to
be spilled m order that the black race might cross into the
Promised Land It took them some time to make him stop
so the wedding could go on After the wedding they stayed
about a month Then one day father and grandfather went
east, to Washington, and got a commission from the gov-
ernment to come down here, to help with the freed Negroes
They came to Jefferson, all except fathers sisters Two of
them got married, and the youngest one went to live with
one of the others, and grandfather and father and Calvin
and his mother came here and bought the house And then
what they probably knew all the time was going to happen
did happen, and father was alone until my mother came
from New Hampshire They had never even seen one an-
other before, not even a picture They got marned the day
she got here and two years later I was bom and father
named me Joanna after Calvins mother I dont think he
even wanted another son at all I cant remember him very
well The only time I can remember him as somebody, a
person, was when he took me and showed me Calvins and
grandpa's graves It was a bright day, m the spring I re-
member how I didn't want to go, without even knowing



221

where it was that we were going I didn't want to go into
the cedars I dont know why I didn't want to I couldn't
have known what was in there, I was ]ust four then And
even if I had known, that should not have frightened a
child I think it was something about father, something that
came from the cedar grove to me, through him A some-
thing that I felt that he had put on the cedar grove, and
that when I went into it, the grove would put on me so that
I would never be able to forget it I dont know But he made
me go m, and the two of us standing there, and he said,
"Remember this Your grandfather and brother are lying
there, murdered not by one white man but by the curse
which God put on a whole race before your grandfather 01
your bi other or me or you were even thought of A race
doomed and cmsed to be forever and ever a part of the
white race's doom and curse fox its sms Remember that His
doom and his curse Forever and ever Mine Your mothers
Yours, even though you are a child The curse of every white
child that ever was bom and thrt ever will be born None
can escape it * And I said, 'Not even me?' And he said, ‘Not
even you Least of all, you’l had seen and known Negroes
smce I could remember 1 just looked at them as I did at
ram, or furniture, or food or sleep But after that I seemed
to see them for the first time not as people, but as a thing,
a shadow m which I lived, we lived, all white people, all
other people I thought of all the children commg forever
and evei into the woild, white, with the black shadow al
ready falling upon them before they drew breath And 1.
seemed to see the black shadow in the shape of a cross And
it seemed like the white babies were struggling, even before
they drew breath, to escape from the shadow that was not
only upon them but beneath them too, flung out like their
arms were flung out, as if they were nailed to the cross I
saw all the little babies that would ever be in the world,
the ones not yet even bom — a long line of them with their



222


arms spread, on the black crosses I couldn't tell then
whether I saw it or dreamed it But it was terrible to me I
cried at night At last I told father, tried to tell him What
I wanted to tell him was that I must escape, get away from
under the shadow, or I would die *You cannot/ he said
Ton must struggle, rise But m order to use, you must raise
the shadow with you But you can never lift it to your level
I see that now, which I did not see until I came down here
But escape it you cannot The curse of the black race is
Gods curse But the curse of the white race is the black
man who will be forever God's chosen own because He
once cursed Him * ” Her voice ceased Across the vague ob-
long of open door fireflies diifted At last Christmas said

“There was something I was going to ask you But I
guess I know the answer myself now”

She did not stir Her voice was quiet “What?”

“Why your father never killed that fellow — what's his
name? Sartons ”

“Oh,” she said Then there was silence again Across the
door the fireflies drifted and drifted “You would have
Wouldn't you?”

“Yes,” he said, at once, immediately Then he knew that
she was looking toward his voice almost as if she could
see him Her voice was almost gentle now, it was so quiet,
so still

“You dont have any idea who your parents were?”

If she could have seen his face she would have found it
sullen, brooding “Except that one of them was part nigger
Like I told you before ”

She was still looking at him, her voice told him that
It was quiet, impersonal, interested without being curious
*How do you know that?”

He didn't answer for some time Then he said “I dont
know it” Agam his voice ceased, by its sound she knew
that he was looking away, toward the door His face was



223

sullen, quite still Then he spoke again, moving, his voice
now had an overtone, unmrrthful yet quizzical, at once
humorless and sardonic “If I’m not, damned if I haven’t
wasted a lot of time ”

She in turn seemed to muse now, quiet, scarcebreathing,
yet still with nothing of selfpity or retrospect “I had
thought of that Why father didn’t shoot Colonel S art oris
I think that it was because of his French blood ”

“French blood?” Christmas said "Dont even Frenchmen
get mad when a man kills his father and his son on the
same day? I guess youi father must have got religion
Turned preacher, maybe ”

She did not answer for a time The fireflies drifted, some-
where a dog barked, mellow, sad, faraway "I thought
about that,” she said “It was all over then The killing in
uniform and with flags, and the killing without uniforms
and flags And none of it doing or did any good None of
it And we were foreigners, strangers, that drought differ-
ently from the people whose country we had come into
without being asked or wanted And he was French, half
of him Enough French to respect anybody^ love for the
land where he and his people were bom and to understand
that a man would have to act as the land where he was bom
had trained him to act I think that was it ”



12


IN THIS WAY THE SECOND PHASE BEGAN IT WAS AS THOUGH

he had fallen into a sewer As upon another life he looked
hack upon that first hard and manlike surrender, that sur-
render terrific and hard, like the breaking down of a spirit-
ual skeleton the very sound of whose snapping fibers could
be heard almost by the physical ear, so that the act of capit-
ulation was anticlimax, as when a defeated general on the
day after the last battle, shaved overnight and with his
boots cleaned of the mud of combat, surrenders his sword
to a committee

The sewer ran only by night The days were the same as
they had ever been He went to work at half past six m the
morning He would leave the cabin without looking to-
ward the house at all At six in the evening he returned,
again without even looking toward the house He washed
and changed to the white shirt and the dark creased trou-
sers and went to the kitchen and found his supper waiting
on the table and he sat and ate it, still without having seen
her at all But he knew that she was m the house and that
the coming of dark within the old walls was breaking down
something and leaving it corrupt with waiting He knew
how she had spent the day, that her days also were no dif-
224



225

ferent from what they had always been, as if m her case
too another person had lived them All day long he would
imagine her, going about hei housework, sitting for that
unvarymg period at the scarred desk, or talking, listening,
to the Negro women who came to the house from both
directions up and down the road, following paths which
had been years m the wearing and which radiated from
the house like wheelspokes What they talked about to her
he did not know, though he had watched them approach-
ing the house m a m annex not exactly secret, yet purpose-
ful, entering usually singly though sometimes m twos and
threes, m their apions and headrags and now and then
with a man s coat thrown about their shoulders, emerging
again and returning down the radiating paths not fast and
yet not loitering They would be brief m his mind, thinking
Now she is doing this Now she is doing that not thinking
much about her He believed that during the day she
thought no more about him than he did about her, too
Even when at night, in her dark bedroom, she insisted on
telling him m tedious detail the trivial matters of her day
and insisted on his telling her of his day m turn, it was m
the fashion of lovers that imperious and insatiable demand
that the trivial details of both days be put into woids, with-
out any need to listen to the telling Then he would finish
his supper and go to her where she waited Often he would
not huiry As time went on and the novelty of the second
phase began to wear off and become babit, he would stand
in the kitchen door and look out across the dusk and see,
perhaps with foreboding and premonition, the savage and
lonely street which he had chosen of his own will, waiting
for him, thmkmg This is not my life 1 dont belong here
At first it shocked him the abject fury of the New Eng*
land glacier exposed suddenly to the fire of the New Eng
land biblical hell Perhaps he was aware of the abnegation
m it the imperious and fieice urgency that concealed an



226

actual despair at frustrate and irrevocable years, which she
appeared to attempt to compensate each night as if she be-
lieved that it would be the last night on earth by damning
herself forever to the hell of her forefatheis, by living not
alone in sm but m filth She had an avidity for the forbid-
den wordsymbols, an insatiable appetite for the sound of
them on his tongue and on her own She revealed the terri-
ble and impersonal curiosity of a child about forbidden
subjects and objects, that rapt and tireless and detached
interest of a surgeon m the physical body and its possibili-
ties And by day he would see the calm, coldfaced, almost
manlike, almost middleaged woman who had hved for
twenty years alone, without any feminine fears at all, in a
lonely house in a neighborhood populated, when at all, by
Negroes, who spent a certain portion of each day sitting
tranquilly at a desk and writing tranquilly for the eyes of
both youth and age the practical advice of a combined
priest and banker and trained nurse

During that period (it could not be called a honeymoon)
Christmas watched her pass through every avatar of a
woman m love Soon she more than shocked him she as-
tonished and bewildered him She surprised and took him
unawares with fits of jealous rage She could have had no
such experience at all, and there was neither reason for
the scene nor any possible protagonist he knew that she
knew that It was as it she had invented the whole tiling
deliberately, for the purpose of playing it out like a play
Yet she did it with such fury, with such convincingness
and such conviction, that on the first occasion he thought
that she was under a delusion and the third time he thought
that she was mad She revealed an unexpected and infalli-
ble instinct for intrigue She insisted on a place for conceal-
ing notes, letters It was m a hollow fence post below the
rotting stable He never saw her put a note there, yet she



227

insisted on his visiting it daily, when he did so, the letter
would be there When he did not and lied to her, he would
find that she had already set traps to catch him in the lie,
she cried, wept

Sometimes the notes would tell him not to come until
a certain hour, to that house which no white person save
himself had entered m years and m which for twenty years
now she had been all night alone, for a whole week she
forced him to climb into a window to come to her He
would do so and sometimes he would have to seek her
about the dark house until he found her, hidden, in clos-
ets, m empty rooms, waiting, panting, her eyes m the dark
glowing like the eyes of cats Now and then she appointed
trysts beneath certain shrubs about the grounds, where he
would find her naked, or with her clothing half tom to rib-
bons upon her, m the wild throes of nymphomania, her
body gleaming in the slow shifting from one to another of
such formally erotic attitudes and gestures as a Beardsley
of the time of Petromus might have drawn She would be
wild then, in the close, breathing halfdark without walls,
with her wild hair, each strand of which would seem to
come alive like octopus tentacles, and her wild hands and
her breathing “Negro* Negro* Negro*”

Within six months she was completely corrupted* It
could not be said that he corrupted her His own life,
for all its anonymous promiscuity, had been conventional
enough, as a life of healthy and normal sin usually is The
corruption came from a source even more inexplicable to
him than to her In fact, it was as though with the corrup-
tion which she seemed to gather from the air itself, she be-
gan to corrupt him He began to be afraid He could not
have said of what But he began to see himself as from a
distance, like a man being sucked down into a bottomless
morass He bad not exactly thought that yet What he was



228


now seeing was the street lonely savage, and cool That
was it cool, he was thinking, saying aloud to himself some-
times, “X better move I better get away from here *

But something held him, as the fatalist can always be
held by cmiosity, pessimism, by sheer inertia Meanwhile
the affair went on, submerging him more and more by the
imperious and overndmg fury of those nights Perhaps he
realised that he could not escape Anyway, he stayed,
watching the two creatures that smuggled m the one body
like two moongleamed shapes struggling drowning m alter-
nate throes upon the surface of a black thick pool beneath
the last moon Now it would be that still, cold, contained
figure of the first phase who, even though lost and damned,
remained somehow impervious and impregnable, then it
would be the other, the second one, who in furious denial
of that impregnability strove to drown m the black abyss
of its own creating that physical purity which had been
preserved too long now even to be lost Now and then they
would come to the black surface, locked like sisters, the
black waters would dram away Then the world would lush
hack the room, the walls, the peaceful myriad sound of
insects from beyond the summer windows where insects
had whirred for forty )ears She would stare at him then
with the wild, despairing face of a stranger, looking at her
then he paraphrased himself “She wants to pi ay, but she
dont know how to do that either 7

She had begun to get fat

The end of this phase was not sharp, not a climax like
the first It merged into the third phase so gradually that
he could not have said where one stopped and the other
began It was summer becoming fall, with already, like
shadows before \ westenng sun, the chill and implacable
import of autumn cast ahead upon summer, something of
dying summei spurting again like a dymg coal, m the fall



229

This was over a period of two years He still worked at the
planing mill, and m the meantime he had begun to sell a
little whiskey, very judiciously, restricting himself to a few
discreet customers none of whom knew the others She did
not know this, although he kept his stock hidden on the
place and met his clients in the woods beyond the pasture
Very likely she would not have objected But neither would
Mis McEachei n have objected to the hidden rope, perhaps
he did not tell her foi the same reason that he did not tell
Mrs McEachem Thinking of Mrs McEachem and the rope
and of the waitress whom he had never told where the
money came from which he gave to hei, and now of hi 4
present mistress and the whiskey, he could almost believe
that it was not to make money that he sold the whiskey but
because he was doomed to conceal always something from
the women who surrounded him Meanwhile he would see
her from a distance now and then in the daytime, about the
rear premises, where moved articulate beneath the clean,
austere garments which she wore that rotten richness ready
to flow into putrefaction at a touch, like something growing
in a swamp, not once looking toward the cabm or toward
him And when he thought of that other personality that
seemed to exist somewhere in physical darkness itself, it
seemed to him that what he now saw by daylight was a
phantom of someone whom the night sister had murdered
and which now moved purposeless about the scenes of old
peace, robbed even of the power of lamenting

Of course the first fury of the second phase could not
Iasi At first it had been a torrent, now it was a tide, with
a flow and ebb During its flood she could amost fool them
both It was as if out of her knowledge that it was just a
flow that must presently react was bom a wilder fury, a
fierce denial that could flag itself and him into physical ex-
perimentation that transcended imagining, carried them as
though by momentum alone, bearing them without volt-



230

non or plan It was as if she knew somehow that tune was
short, that autumn was almost upon her, without knowing
yet the exact significance of autumn It seemed to be in-
stinct alone instinct physical and instinctive denial of the
wasted years Then the tide would ebb Then they would
be stranded as behind a dying mistral, upon a spent and
satiate beach, looking at one another like strangers, with
hopeless and reproachful (on his part with weaiy on hers
with despairing) eyes

But the shadow of autumn was upon her She began to
talk about a child, as though instinct had warned her that
now was the time when she must either justify or expiate
She talked about it m the ebb periods At first the begin-
ning of the night was always a flood, as if the hours of light
and of separation had dammed up enough of the wasting
stream to simulate torrent for a moment at least But after
a while the stream became too thin for that he would go to
her now with reluctance, a stranger, already backlookmg,
a stranger he would leave her after having sat with her
m the dark bedroom, talking of still a third stranger He
noticed now how, as though by premeditation, they met
always m the bedroom, as though they were married No
more did he have to seek her through the house, the mghts
when he must seek her, hidden and panting and naked,
about the dark house or among the shrubbery of the ruined
park were as dead now as the hollow fencepost below the
bam

That was all dead the scenes, the faultlessly played
scenes of secret and monstrous delight and of jealousy
Though if she had but known it now, she had reason for
jealousy He made trips every week or so, on busmess, he
told her She did not know that the business took him
to Memphis, where he betrayed her with other women,
women bought for a pnee She did not know it Perhaps
m the phase in which she now was she could not have been



231

convinced, would not have listened to proof, would not
have cared Because she had taken to lying sleepless most
of the night, making up the sleep m the afternoons She was
not sick, it was not her body She had never been better,
her appetite was enormous and she weighed thirty pounds
more than she had ever weighed m her life It was not that
that kept her awake It was something out of the darkness,
the earth, the dymg summer itself something threatful and
terrible to her because instinct assured her that it would
not harm her, that it would overtake and betray her com-
pletely, but she would not be harmed that on the contrary,
she would be saved, that life would go on the same and
even better, even less terrible What was terrible was that
she did not want to be saved *Tm not ready to pray yet,”
she said aloud, quietly, rigid, soundless, her eyes wide open,
while the moon poured and poured into the window, filling
the room with something cold and irrevocable and wild
with regret “Dont make me have to pray yet Dear God,
let me be damned a little longer, a little while ” She seemed
to see her whole past life, the starved years, like a gray tun-
nel, at the far and irrevocable end of which, as unfading as
a reproach, her naked breast of three short years ago ached
as though m agony, virgin and crucified, “Not yet, dear
God Not yet, dear God”

So when he now came to her, after the passive and cold
and seemly transports of sheer habit she began to speak of
a child She talked about it impersonally at first, discussing
children Perhaps it was sheer and instinctive feminine cun-
ning and indirection, perhaps not Anyway, it was some
time before he discovered with a land of shock that she
was discussing it as a possibility, a practical thought He
said No at once

'Why not?” she said She looked at him, speculative He
was thinking fast, thinking She wants to he married That’s
tt She wants a child no more than I do 'It s just a trick/ he



232

thought I should have known it* expected it I should have
cleared out of here a year ago ’ But he was afraid to tell her
this, to let the word marnage come between them, come
aloud, thinking, ‘She may not have thought of it, and I will
just put the notion in her head’ She was watching him
‘‘Why not?” she said And then something in him flashed
Why not P It would mean ease, security , for the rest of ijour
life You would never have to move again And you might
as well he married to her as this thinking, ‘No If I give in
now, I will deny all the thirty years that I have lived to
make me what I chose to be ’ He said
“If we were going to have one, I guess we would have
had one two years ago ”

“We didn't want one then 5
We dont want one now, eithei,” he said
That was m September Just after Christmas she told him
that she was pregnant Almost before she ceased to speak,
he believed that she was lying He discovered now that he
had been expectmg her to tell him that for three months
Bui when he looked at her face, he knew that she was not
He believed that she also knew that she was not He
thought, ‘Here it comes She will say it now marry* But I
can at least get out of the house first 5
But she did not She was sitting quite still on the bed,
her hands on her lap, her still New England face (it was
still the face of a spmster prominently boned, long, a little
thin, almost manlike m contrast to it her plump body was
more richly and softly ammal than ever) lowered She said,
m a tone musing, detached, impersonal “A full measure
Even to a bastard Negro child I would like to see father' s
and Calvin’s faces This will be a good time for you to run,
if that’s what you want to do ” But it was as though she
were not listening to her own voice, did not intend for
the words to have any actual meaning that final upflare
of stubborn and dying summer upon which autumn, the



233

dawning of half death, had come unawares Its over now,
she thought quietly, ‘finished ' Except the waiting, for one
month more to pass, to be sure, she had learned that from
the Negro women, that you could not alwa\ s tell until after
two months She would have to wait another month, watch-
ing the calendar She made a mark on the calendar to be
suie, so there would be no mistake, through the bedroom
window she watched that month accomplish A frost had
come, and some of the leaves were beginning to turn The
marked day on the calendar came and passed, she gave
herself another week, to be doublv sure She was not
elated, since she was not surprised "I am with cfuld/’ she
said, quiedy, aloud

Til go tomorrow/ he told himself, that same day Til go
Sunday/ he thought Til wait and get this week's pay, and
then I am gone' He began to look forward to Saturday,
planning where he would go He did not see her all that
week He expected her to send for him When he entered
or left the cabin he would find himself avoiding looking
toward the house, as he had during the first week he was
there He did not see her at all Now and then he would
see the Negro women, m nondescript garments agamst the
autumn chill, commg or going along the worn paths, enter-
ing or leaving the house But that was all When Saturday
came, he did not go ‘Might as well have all the jack I can
get/ he thought ‘If she amt anxious for me to clear out,
no reason why I should be 1 11 go next Saturday ’

He stayed on The weather remained cold, bright and
cold When he went to bed now m his cotton blanket, in
the draughty cabin, he would think of the bedroom m the
house, with its fire, its ample, quilted, Imtpadded covers
He was nearer to selfpity than he had ever been ‘She might
at least send me another blanket/ he thought So might ha
have bought one But he did not Neither did she He



234

waited He waited what he thought was a long time Then
one evenmg m February he returned home and found a
note from her on his cot It was brief, it was an order al-
most, directing him to come to the house that night He
was not surprised He had never yet known a woman who,
without another man available, would not come around m
time And he knew now that tomorrow he would go ‘This
must be what I have been waiting for/ he thought, 1 have
just been waiting to be vindicated 5 When he changed his
clothes, he shaved also He prepared himself like a bride-
groom, unaware of it He found the table set for him m
the kitchen, as usual, during all the time that he had not
seen her, that had never failed He ate and went upstairs
He did not hurry ‘We got all night/ he thought It’ll be
something for her to think about tomorrow night and the
next one, when she finds that cabm empty ’ She was sitting
before the fire She did not even turn her head when he en-
tered “Bring that chair up with you/’ she said
This was how the third phase began It puzzled him for
a while, even more than the other two He had expected
eagerness, a land of tacit apology, or lacking that, an ac-
quiescence that wanted only to be wooed He was prepared
to go that length, even What he found was a stranger who
put aside with the calm firmness of a man his hand when
at last and m a kmd of baffled desperation he went and
touched her “Come on/’ he said, “if you have something
to tell me We always talk better afterward It wont hurt
the kid, if that’s what you have been afraid of ”

She stayed him with a single word, for the first time he
looked at her face he looked upon a face cold, remote, and
fanatic “Do you realise/’ she said, “that you are wasting
your life?” And he sat looking at her like a stone, as if he
could not believe his own ears
It took him some time to comprehend what she meant
She did not look at him at all She sat looking into the fire,



235

her face cold, still, brooding, talking to him as if he were
a stranger, while he listened in outraged amazement She
wanted him to take over all her business affairs — the cor-
respondence and the periodical visits — with the Negro
schools She had the plan all elaborated She recited it to
him m detail while he listened in mounting rage and amaze-
ment He was to have complete charge, and she would be
his secretary assistant they would travel to the schools to-
gether, visit in the Negro homes together, listening, even
with his anger, he knew that the plan was mad And all the
while her calm profile m the peaceful firelight was as grave
and tranquil as a portrait in a frame When he left, he re-
membered that she had not once mentioned the expected
child

He did not yet believe that she was mad He thought that
it was because she was pregnant, as he believed that was
why she would not let him touch her He tried to argue
with her But it was like trying to argue with a tree she
did not even rouse herself to deny, she just listened quietly
and then talked again m that level, cold tone as if he had
never spoken When he rose at last and went out he did
not even know if she was aware that he had gone

He saw her but once more within the next two months*
He followed his daily routine, save that he did not ap-
proach the house at all now, taking his meals downtown
again, as when he had first gone to work at the mill But
then, when he first went to work, he would not need to
think of her during the day, he hardly ever thought about
her Now he could not help himself She was in his mind
so constantly that it was almost as if he were looking at
her, there m the house, patient, waiting, mescapable, crazy
During the first phase it had been as though he were out-
side a house where snow was on the ground, trying to get
into the house, during the second phase he was at the bot-
tom of a pit m the hot wild darkness, now he was m the



236

middle ot a plain where there was no house, not even snow,
not even wind

He btgan now to be afraid, whose feeling up to now had
been bewilderment and perhaps foiebodmg and fatality
He now had a paitner m his whiskey business a stranger
named Biown who had appeared at the mill one day early
in the spring, seeking work He knew that the man was a
fool, but at first he thought, ‘At least he will have sense
enough to do what I tell him to do He wont have to think
himself at all’, it was not until later that he said to himself
1 know now that what makes a fool is an inability to take
even his own good advice ’ He took Brown because Brown
was a strangei and had a certain cheerful and unscrupulous
readiness about him, and not overmuch personal courage,
knowing that m the hands of a judicious man, a coward
within his own limitations can be made fairly useful to any-
one except himself

His fear was that Brown might learn about the woman
in the house and do something n revocable out of his own
unpredictable folly He was afraid that the woman, since
he had avoided hex, might take it into her head to come to
the cabin some night He had not seen her but once since
February That was when he sought her to tell her that
Brown was coming to live with him m the cabin It was on
Sunday He called her, and she came oat to where he stpod
on the back porch and listened quietly “You didn’t have
to do that,” she said He didn’t understand then what she
meant It was not until later that thinking agam flashed,
complete, like a printed sentence She thmks that 1
bought him out here to keep her off She believes that I
think that with him there, she wont dare come down to the
cabin , that she will have to let me alone

Thus he put his behef, his fear of what she might do,
into his own mind by believing that he had put it into hers



237

He believed that, since she had thought that, that Brown's
presence would not only not deter her it would be an in-
centive for her to come to the cabin Because of the fact
that for over a month now she had done notlnng at all,
made no move at all, he believed that she might do any-
thing Now he too lay awake at night But he was thinking,
1 have got to do something There is something that I am
gomg to do *

So he would trick and avoid Brown m order to reach
the cabin first He expected each time to find hei waiting
When he would reach the cabin and find it empty, he
would think m a kmd of impotent rage of the urgency, the
lying and the haste, and of her alone and idle in the house
all day, with nothing to do save to decide whether to be-
tray him at once 01 torture him a little longer By ordinary
he would not have minded whether Brown knew about
their lelations or not He had nothing m his nature of reti-
cence or of chivalry toward women It was practical, mate-
rial He would have been indifferent if all Jefferson knew
he was her lover it was that he wanted no one to begin
to speculate on what his private life out there was because
of the hidden whiskey which was netting him thirty or forty
dollais a week That was one reason Another reason was
vanity He would have died or murdered rather than have
anyone, another man, learn what their relations had now
become That not only had she changed her life com-
pletely, but that she was trying to change his too and
make of him somethmg between a hermit and a missionary
to Negroes He believed that if Brown learned the one, he
must inevitably learn the other So he would reach the
cabm at last, after the lying and the hurry, and as he put
his hand on the door, remembering the haste and thmking
that m a moment he would find that it had not been neces-
sary at all and yet to neglect which precaution he dared



238


not, he would hate her with a fierce revulsion of dread and
impotent rage Then one evemng he opened the door and
found the note on the cot

He saw it as soon as he entered, lying square and white
and profoundly inscrutable against the dark blanket He
did even stop to think that he believed he knew what the
message would be, would promise He felt no eagerness, he
felt relief Tt’s over now,’ he thought, not yet taking up the
folded paper Tt will be like it was before now No more
talking about niggers and babies She has come around
She has worn the other out, seen that she was getting no-
where She sees now that what she wants, needs, is a man
She wants a man by night, what he does by daylight does
not matter * He should have realised then the reason why
he had not gone away He should have seen that he was
bound just as tightly by that small square of still undivulg-
mg paper as though it were a lock and chain He did not
think of that He saw only himself once again on the verge
of promise and delight It would be quieter though, now
They would both want it so, besides the whiphand which
he would now have ‘All that foolishness/ he thought, hold-
ing the yet unopened paper m his hands, ‘all that damn
foolishness She is still she and I am still I And now, after
all this damn foolishness*, thinking how they would both
laugh over it tonight, later, afterward, when the time for
quiet talking and quiet laughing came at the whole thing,
at one another, at themselves

He did not open the note at all He put it away and
washed and shaved and changed his clothes, whistling
while he did so He had not finished when Brown came m
^“Well, well, well/* Brown said Christmas said nothing He
was facing the shard of mirror nailed to the wall, knotting
his tie Brown had stopped in the center of the floor a
tall, lean, young man in dirty overalls, with a dark, weakly
handsome face and curious eyes Beside his mouth there



289

was a narrow scar as white as a thread of spittle After a
while Brown said “Looks like you are going somewhere *
“Does it?” Christmas said He did not look around He
whistled monotonously but truly something m minor,
plaintive and negroid

“I reckon I wont bother to clean up none,” Brown said,
“seeing as you aie almost ready”

Christmas looked back at him “Ready for what?”

“Amt you going to town?”

“Did I ever say I wasp’ Christmas said He turned back
to the glass

“Oh,” Brown said He watched the back of Christmas’s
head “Well, I reckon from that that you’re going on pri-
vate business ” He watched Christmas “This here’s a cold
night to be laymg around on the wet ground without noth-
ing under you but a thin gal ”

“Amt it, though?” Christmas said, whistling, preoccupied
and unhurried He turned and picked up his coat and put
it on, Brown still watching him He went to the door “See
you m the morning,” he said The door did not close behind
him He knew that Brown was standing m it, looking after
him But he did not attempt to conceal his purpose He
went on toward the house ‘Let him watch,’ he thought
‘Let him follow me if he wants to 7
The table was set for him m the kitchen Before sitting
down he took the unopened note from his pocket and laid
it beside his plate It was not enclosed, not sealed, it sprang
open of its own accord, as though inviting him, insisting
But he did not look at it He began to eat He ate without
haste He had almost finished when he raised his head sud-
denly, listening Then he rose and went to the door through
which he had entered, with the noiselessness of a cat, and
jerked the door open suddenly Brown stood just outside,
his face leaned to the door, or where the door had been,
The light fell upon his face and upon it was an expression



240

of intent and infantile interest which became surprise while
Christmas looked at it, then it recovered, falling back a lit-
tle Brown s vOo.ee was gleeful though quiet, cautious, con-
spiratorial, as if he had already established his alliance and
sympathy with Christmas, unasked, and without waitmg to
know what was going on, out of loyalty to his partner or
perhaps to abstract man as opposed to all women “Well,
well, well,” he said “So this is where you tomcat to every
night Right at our front door, you might say — ”

Without saying a word Christmas struck him The blow
did not fall hard, because Brown was already m innocent
and gleeful backmotion, m midsnicker as it were The blow
cut his voice short off, moving, springing backward, he
vanished from the fall of hght, into the darkness, from
which his voice came, still not loud, as if even now he
would not jeopardise his partner s business, but tense now
with alarm, astonishment “Dont you hit me ! ” He was the
taller of the two a gangling shape already m a ludicrous
diffusion of escape as if he were on the pomt of clattering
to earth m complete disintegration as he stumbled back-
ward before die steady and still silent advance of the other
Again Browns voice came, high, full of alarm and spurious
direat “Dont you hit me!” This time the blow struck his
shoulder as he turned He was running now He lan for a
hundred yards before he slowed, looking back Then he
stopped and turned “You durn yellowbelhed wop,” he said,
in a tentative tone, jerking his head immediately, as if his
Voice had made more noise, sounded louder, than he had
intended There was no sound from the house, the kitchen
door was daik again, closed again He raised his voice a
little "You dum yellowbelhed wop 1 111 learn you who you
are monkeying with” There came no sound anywhere It
was chilly He turned and went back to the cabin, mum-
bling to himself

When Christmas re-entered the kitchen he did npt even



241

look back at the table on which lay the note which he
had not yet read He went on through the door which led
into the house and on to the stairs He began to mount, not
fast He mounted steadily, he could now see the bedroom
door, a crack of light, firelight, beneath xt He went steadily
on and put his hand upon the door Then he opened ir and
he stopped dead still She was sittmg at a table, beneath the
lamp He saw a figuie that he knew, m a severe garment
that he knew — a garment that looked as if it had been made
for and worn by a careless man Above it he saw a head
with han just beginning to gray drawn gauntly back to a
knot as savage and ugly as a wart on a diseased bough
Then she looked up at him and he saw that she wore steel
rimmed spectacles which he had never seen befoie He
stood in the door, his hand still on the knob, quite motion
less It seemed to him that he could actually hear the words
mside him You should have read that note You should
have read that note thinking, T am going to do something
Going to do something 7

He was still hearing that while he stood beside the table
on which papers were scattered and from which she had
not risen, and listened to the calm enormity which her cold,
still voice unfolded, his mouth repeating the words after
her while he looked down at the scattered and emgmaic
papeis and documents and thinking fled smooth and idle,
wondering what this paper meant and what that paper
meant “To school ” his mouth said

“Yes,” she said “They will take you Any of them will
On my account You can choose any one you want among
them We wont even have to pay ”

“To school,” his mouth said “A mgger school Me”

“Yes Then you can go to Memphis You can read law in
Peebles's office He will teach you law Then you can take
charge of all the legal business All this, all that he does,
Peebles does *



242

“And then learn law m the office of a nigger lawyer,” his
mouth said

“Yes Then I will turn over all the business to you, all the
money All of it So that when you need money for yourself
you could you would know how, lawyers know how
to do it so that it You would be helping them up out
of darkness and none could accuse or blame you even
if they found out even if you did not replace
but you could replace the money and none would ever
know

“But a nigger college, a nigger lawyer,” Ins voice said,
quiet, not even argumentative, just promptive They were
not looking at one another, she had not looked up smce he
entered

“Tell them,” she said

“Tell niggers that I am a nigger too?” She now looked at
him Her face was quite calm It was the face of an old
woman now

“Yes You’ll have to do that So they wont charge you
anything On my account”

Then it was as if he said suddenly to his mouth 'Shut
up Shut up that drivel Let me talk’ He leaned down
She did not move Their faces were not a foot apart the
one cold, dead white, fanatical, mad, the other parchment-
colored, the lip lifted into the shape of a soundless and
ngid snarl He said quietly ''You’re old I never noticed
that before An old woman You’ve got gray ra your hair ”
She struck him, at once, with her flat hand, the rest of her
body not moving at all Her blow made a flat sound, his
blow as close upon it as echo He struck with his fist, then
in that long blowing wind he jerked her up from the chair
and held her, facing him, motionless, not a flicker upon
her still face, while the long wind of knowing rushed down
upon him “You haven’t got any baby ” he said “You never
had one There is not anything the matter with you except



24 ?

being old 'iou just got old and it happened to you and uom
you aie not any good any more That's all that s wrong with
you w He released her and struck her agam She fell huddled
onto the bed, looking up at him, and he struck her in the
face agam and standing over her he spoke to her the words
which she had once loved to hear on his tongue, which she
used to say that she could taste there, murmurous, obscene,
caressmg That's all You’re just worn out You’re not any
good any more That’s all ”

She lay on the bed, on her side, her head turned and
looking up at him across her bleeding mouth “Maybe it
would be better if we both were dead, ’ she said

He could see the note lying on the blanket as soon as
he opened the door Then he would go and take it up and
open it He would now remember the hollow fencepost as
something of which he had heard told, as having taken
place in another life from any that he had ever lived
Because the paper, the ink, the form and shape, were the
same They had never been long, they were not long now
But now there was nothing evocative of unspoken promise,
of rich and unmentionable delights, m them They were
now briefer than epitaphs and more terse than commands

His first impulse would be to not go He believed that
he dared not go Then he knew that he dared not fail to
go He would not change his clothes now In his sweat-
stained overalls he would traverse the late twilight of May
and enter the kitchen The table was never set with food
fox him now Sometimes he would look at it as he passed
and he would think, ‘My God When have I sat down m
peace to eat ’ And he could not remember

He would go on mto the house and mount the stairs Al-
ready he would be hearing her voice It would increase as
he mounted and until he reached the door to the bedroom.
The door would be .shut, locked, from beyond it the mo-



244

notonous steady voice came He could not distinguish the
words, only the ceaseless monotone He dared not try to
distinguish the woids He did not dare let himself know
what she was at So he would stand theie and wait, and
after a while the voice would cease and she would open
the door and he would enter As he passed the bed he
would look down at the floor beside it and it would seem
to him that he could distinguish the punts of knees and
he would jerk his eyes away as if it were death that they
had looked at

Likely the lamp would not yet be lighted They did not
sit down Again they stood to talk, as they used to do two
years ago, standing m the dusk while her voice repeated its
tale “ not to school, then, if you dont want to go
Do without that Your soul Expiation of ” And
he waiting, cold, still, until she had finished " hell
forevei and ever and ever

"No,” he said And she would listen as quietly, and he
knew that she was not convinced and she knew that he
was not Yet neither suirendered, worse they would not
let one anothei alone, he would not even go away And
they would stand for a while longer m the quiet dusk peo-
pled, as though from their loins, by a myriad ghosts of dead
sms and delights, looking at one another's still and fading
face, weary, spent, and indomitable

Then he would leave And befoie the doox had shut and
the bolt had shot to behind him, he would hear the voice
again, monotonous, calm, and despairing, saying wdiat and
to what or whom he dared not learn nor suspect And as
he sat in the shadows of the ruined garden on that August
night three months later and heard the clock m the court-
house two miles away strike ten and then eleven, he
believed with calm paradox that he was die volitionless
servant of the fatality m which he believed that he did not



245

believe He was saying to himself I had to do it already in
the past tense, I had to do it She said so herself

She had said it two nights ago He found the note and
went to her As he mounted the stairs the monotonous voice
grew loudei, sounded louder and clearer than usual When
he reached the top of the stairs he saw why The door was
open this time, and she did not rise from where she knelt
beside the bed when he entered She did not stir, her voice
did not cease Her head was not bowed Her face was lifted,
almost with pride, her attitude of formal abjectness a part
of the pride, her voice calm and tranquil and abnegant m
the twilight She did not seem to be aware that he had en-
tered until she finished a period Then she turned her head
"Kneel with me” she said
"No," he said

"Kneel," she said “You wont even need to speak to Him
yourself Just kneel Just make the first move ”

"No,” he said "Im going ”

She didn’t move, looking back and up at him “Joe,” she
said, "will you stay? Will you do that much?”

"Yes,” he said "111 stay But make it fast ”

She prayed again She spoke quietly, with that abjectness
of pride When it was necessary to use the symbolwords
which he had taught her, she used them, spoke them forth-
right and without hesitation, talking to God as if He were
a man m the room with two other men She spoke of her-
self and of him as of two other people, her voice still, mo-
notonous, sexless Then she ceased She rose quietly They
stood in the twilight, facing one another This time she did
not even ask the question, he did not even need to reply
After a time she said quietly
"Then there’s just one other thing to do *

"There’s just one other thing to do,” he said

'So now it’s all done, all finished/ he thought quietly, sit



246

tang m the dense shadow of the shrubbery, hearing the last
stroke of the fai clock cease and die away It was a spot
where he had overtaken her, found her on one of the wild
nights two years ago But that was m another time, another
life Now it was still, quiet, the fecund earth now coolly
suspirant The dark was filled with the voices, myriad, out
of all time that he had known, as though all the past was a
fiat pattern And gomg on tomorrow mght, all the tomor-
rows, to be a part of the flat pattern, gomg on He thought
of that with quiet astomshment gomg on, myriad, familiar,
since all that had ever been was the same as all that was to
be, smce tomorrow to-be and had-been would be the same
Then it was time

He rose He moved from the shadow and went around
the house and entered the kitchen The house was dark He
had not been to the cabin smce early mornmg and he did
not know if she had left a note for him or not, expected him
or not Yet he did not try for silence It was as if he were
not thinking of sleep, of whether she would be asleep or
not He mounted the stairs steadily and entered the bed-
room Almost at once she spoke from the bed “Light the
lamp,” she said

“It wont need any light,” he said

“Light the lamp ”

“No,” he said He stood over the bed He held the razor
in his hand But it was not open yet But she did not speak
again and then his body seemed to walk away from him. It
went to the table and his hands laid the razor on the table
and found the lamp and struck the match She was sitting
up m the bed, her back against the headboard Over her
nightdress she wore a shawl drawn down across her breast
Her arms were folded upon the shawl, her hands hidden
from sight He stood at the table They looked at one an-
other

“Will you kneel with me?” she said "I dont ask it ”



247


“No,” he said

“I dont ask it It's not I who ask it Kneel with me *

“No”

They looked at one another “Joe,” she said, “for the last
fame I dont ask it Remember that Kneel with me ”

“No,” he said Then he saw her arms unfold and her right
hand come forth fiom beneath the shawl It held an old
style, single action, cap-and-ball revolver almost as long and
heavier than a small rifle But the shadow of it and of her
arm and hand on the wall did not waver at all, the shadow
of both monstrous, the cocked hammer monstrous, back
hooked and viciously poised like the arched head of a
snake, it did not waver at all And her eyes did not waver
at all They were as still as the round black ring of the pistol
muzzle But there was no heat m them, no fury They were
calm and still as all pity and all despair and all conviction.
But he was not watching them He was watching the shad-
owed pistol on the wall, he was watching when the cocked
shadow of the hammer flicked away

Standmg m the middle of the road, with his right hand
lifted full in the glare of the approaching car, he had not
actually expected it to stop Yet it did, with a squealing and
sprawling suddenness that was almost ludicrous It was a
small car, battered and old When he approached it, m the
reflected glare of the headlights two young faces seemed to
float like two softcolored and aghast balloons, the nearer
one, the girl’s, backshrunk m a soft, wide horror But Christ-
mas did not notice this at the time “How about riding with
you, as far as you go?” he said They said nothing at
looking at him with that still and curious horror which h<y
did not notice So he opened the door to enter the rear seat.
When he did so, the girl began to make a choked wailing
sound winch would be much louder m a moment, as fear
gamed courage as it were Already the car was m motion,



248

it seemed to leap forward, and the boy, without moving his
hands from the wheel or turning his head toward the girl
hissed “Shut up* Hush! It s our only chance* Will you hush
now?” Christmas did not hear this either He was sitting
back now, completely unaware that he was riding directly
behind desperate terror He only thought with momentary
interest that the small car was travelling at a pretty reckless
speed for a narrow country road
“How far does tins road go?” he said
The boy told him, naming the same town which the Ne-
gro boy had named to him on that afternoon three years
ago, when he had first seen Jefferson The boy s voice had
a dry, light quality “Do you want to go there, cap’m?”

“All right,” Christmas said “Yes Yes That will do That
will suit me Are you going there?”

“Sure,” the boy said, m that light, flat tone “Wherever
you say ” Again tire girl beside him began that choked, mur-
murous, small-ammalhke moaning, again the boy hissed at
her, his face still rigidly front, the little car rushing and
bouncing onward “Hush* Shhhhhhhhhhh Hush* flush!”
But again Christmas did not notice He saw only the two
young, rigidly forwardlooking heads against the light glare,
mto which the nbbon of the road rushed swaying and flee-
ing But he remarked both them and the fleeing road with-
out curiosity, he was not even paying attention when he
found that the boy had apparently been speaking to him
for some tune, bow far they had come or where they were
he did not know The boy's diction was slow now, recapitu-
lant, each word as though chosen simply and carefully and
spoken slowly and clearly for the ear of a foreigner “Listen,
capm When I turn off up here It's just a short cut A short
cutoff to a better road I am gomg to take the cutoff When
I come to the short cut To the better road So we can get
there quicker See?”

“All right,” Christmas said The car bounced and rushed



249


on, swaying on the curves and up the hills and fleeing down
again as if the earth had dropped from under them Mail
boxes on posts beside the road rushed into the lights and
flicked past Now and then they passed a dark house Again
the boy was speaking

"Now, this here cutoff I was telling you about It's right
down here Im going to turn into it But it dont mean I am
leaving the road I am just going a little way across to a
better road See?”

"AH right,” Christmas said Then for no reason he said
"You must live around here somewhere ”

Now it was the girl who spoke She turned m the seat
whnimg, her small face wan with suspense and terror and
blind and rathke desperation "We do!” she cried "We both
dol Right up yonder! And when my pappy and brothers — ”
Her voice ceased, cut short off, Christmas saw the boy’s
hand clapped upon her lower face and her hands tugging
at the wrist while beneath the hand itself her smotheied
voice choked and bubbled Christmas sat forward
“Here,” he said "111 get out here You can let me out
here ”

"Now you’ve done id” the boy cried, too, thinly, with
despeiate rage too "If you’d just kept quiet — •”

"Stop the car,” Christmas said "I amt going to hurt either
of you I just want to get out ” Again the car stopped with
sprawling suddenness But the engine still raced, and the
car leaped forward again before he was clear of the step,
he had to leap forward running for a few steps to recover
his balance As he did so, something heavy and hard struck
him on the flank The car rushed on, fading at top speed
From it floated back the girl’s shrill wailmg Then it was
gone, the darkness, the now impalpable dust, came down
again, and the silence beneath the summer stars The ob-
ject which had struck him had deliveied an appreciable
blow, then he discovered that the object was attached to



250

his right hand Raising the hand, he found that it held the
ancient heavy pistol He did not know that he had it, he
did not remember having picked it up at all, noi why But
there it was 'And I flagged that car with my right hand,’
he thought 'No wonder she they ' He drew his
right hand back to throw, the pistol balanced upon it Then
he paused, and he struck a match and examined the pistol
in the puny dying glare The match burned down and went
out, yet he still seemed to see the ancient thing with its two
loaded chambers the one upon winch the hammer had al-
ready fallen and which had not exploded, and the other
upon which no hammer had yet fallen but upon which a
hammer had been planned to fall Tor her and for me/ he
said His arm came back, and threw He heard the pistol
crash once through undergrowth Then there was no sound
again Tor her and for me 7



13


WITHIN FIVE MINUTES AFTER THE COUNTRYMAN FOUND fHE

fire, the people began to gather Some of them, also on the
way to town m wagons to spend Saturday, also stopped
Some came afoot from the immediate neighborhood This
was a region of Negro cabins and gutted and outworn fields
out of which a corporal's guard of detectives could not have
combed ten people, man, woman or child, yet which now
within thirty minutes produced, as though out of thin air,
parties and groups rangmg from single individuals to entire
families Still others came out from town in racmg and blat-
ting cars Among these came the sheriff of the county — a
fat, comfortable man with a hard, canny head and a benev-
olent aspect — who thrust away those who crowded to look
down at the body on the sheet with that static and child-
like amaze with which adults contemplate their own ines-
capable portraits Among them the casual Yankees and the
poor whites and even the southerners who had lived for a
while m the north, who believed aloud that it was an anony-
mous negro crime committed not by a negro but by Negro
and who knew, believed, and hoped that she had been rav-
ished too at least once before her throat was cut and at
least once afterward The sheriff came up and looked him**

251



252

self once and then sent the body away, hiding the poor
thing from the eyes

Then there was nothing for them to look at except the
place where the body had lam and the fire And soon no-
body could remember exactly wheie the sheet had rested,
what earth it had covered, and so then theie was only the
fixe to look at So they looked at the fire, with that same
dull and static amaze v Inch they had brought down from
the old fetid caves wheie knowing began, as though, like
death, they had never seen fire before Presently the fire
truck came up gallantly, with noise, with whistles and bells
It was new, painted led, with gilt trim and a handpower
siren and a bell gold m color and m tone serene, arrogant,
and proud About it hatless men and youths clung with the
astonishing disregard of physical laws that flies possess It
had mechanical ladders that sprang to prodigious heights
at the touch of a hand, like opera hats, only there was now
nothing for them to sprnig to It had neat and virgin coils
of hose evocative of telephone trust advertisements m the
popular magazines, but there was nothing to hook them to
and nothing to flow thiough them So the hatless men, who
had deserted counters and desks, swung down, even includ-
ing the one who ground the siren They came too and weie
shown several different places where the sheet had lam, and
some of diem with pistols already m their pockets began to
canvass about for someone to crucify

But theie wasn't anybody She had lived such a quiet
life, attended so to her own affairs, that she bequeathed
to the town m which she had been born and lived and died
a foreigner, an outlander, a kind of heritage of astonishment
and outrage, for which, even though she had supplied them
at last with an emotional barbecue, a Roman holiday al-
most, they would nevei forgive her and let her be dead m
peace and qmet Not that Peace is not that often So they
moiled and clotted, believing that the flames, the blood.



253

the body that had died three years ago and had just now
begun to live again, cried out for vengeance, not believing
that the rapt infury of the flames and the immobility of the
body were both affirmations of an attained bourne beyond
the hurt and harm of man Not that Because the other
made nice believing Better than the shelves and the coun-
ters filled with longfamihar objects bought, not because the
owner desired them or admired them, could take any pleas
ure m the owning of them, but m order to cajole or trick
other men into buying them at a profit, and who must now
and then contemplate both the objects which had not yet
sold and the men who could buy them but had not yet done
so, with anger and maybe outrage and maybe despair too
Better than the musty offices where the lawyers waited lurk-
ing among ghosts of old lusts and lies, or where the doctors
waited with sharp knives and sharp drugs, telling man, be
hevmg that he should believe, without resorting to prmted
admonishments, that they labored for that end whose ulti-
mate attainment would leave them with nothing whatever
to do And die women came too, the idle ones m bright and
sometimes hurried garments, with secret and passionate
and glittering looks and with secret frustrated breasts (who
have ever loved death better than peace) to print with a
myriad small hard heels to the constant murmur Who did
tt? Who did it? periods such as perhaps Is he still free? Ah
Is he ? Is he?

The sheriff also stared at the flames with exasperation
and astonishment, since there was no scene to investigate
He was not yet thinking of himself as having been frus-
trated by a human agent It was the fire It seemed to him
that the fire had been selfborn for that end and purpose
It seemed to him that that by and because of which he had
had ancestors long enough to come himself to be, had allied
itself with crmie So he continued to walk in a baffled and
fretted manner about that heedless monument of the color



254

of both hope and catastrophe until a deputy came up and
told how he had discovered m a cabm beyond the house,
traces of recent occupation And immediately the country-
man who had discovered the fire (he had not yet got to
town, his wagon had not progressed one mch since he
descended from it two hours ago, and he now moved
among the people, wildhaired, gesticulant, with on his face
a dulled, spent, glaring expression and his voice hoarsed
almost to a whisper) remembered that he had seen a man
in the house when he broke in the door
“A white man?” the sheiiff said

“Yes, sir Blumpmg aiound m the hall like he had just
finished falling down the stairs Tried to keep me from go-
ing upstairs at all Told me how he had already been up
there and it wasn't nobody up there And when I come back
down, he was gone "

The sheriff looked about at them “Who lived m that
cabm?"

“I didn't know anybody did," the deputy said “Niggers,
I reckon She might have had niggers living in the house
with her, from what I have heard What I am surprised at
is that it was this long before one of them done for her "
“Get me a nigger," the sheriff said The deputy and two
or three others got him a mgger “Who's been Irving in that
cabin?" the sheriff said

“I don't know, Mr Watt," the Negro said “I amt never
paid it no mmd. I amt even knowed anybody lived m it"
“Bring him on down here," the sheriff said
They were gathering now about the sheriff and the dep-
uty and the Negro, with avid eyes upon which the sheer
prolongation of empty flames had begun to pall, with faces
identical one with another It was as if all their individual
five senses had become one organ of looking, like an apoth-
eosis, the words that flew among them wmd- or air-engen-
dered Is that him? Is that the one that did it P Sheriffs got



255


him Sheriff has already caught him The sheriff looked at
them "Go away/' he said “All of you Go look at the fire
If I need any help, I can send for you Go on away” He
turned and led his party down to the cabin Behind him the
repulsed ones stood m a clump and watched the three white
men and the Negro enter the cabin and close the door Be-
hind them m turn the dying fixe roared, filling the air though
not louder than the voices and much more unsourceless By
God, if that’s him , what are we doing, standing around
here? Murdering a white woman the black son of a None
of them had ever entered the house While she was alive
they would not have allowed their wives to call on her
When they were younger, children (some of their fathers
had done it too) they had called after her on the street,
“Nigger lover? Nigger lover?”

In the cabin the sheriff sat down on one of the cots*
heavily He sighed a tub of a man, with the complete and
rocHike inertia of a tub “Now, I want to know who lives in
this cabin,” he said

“I done told you I dont know ” the Negro said His voice
was a little sullen, quite alert, covertly alert He watched
the sheriff The other two white men were behind him,
where he could not see them He did not look back at them,
not so much as a glance He was watching the sheriff s face
as a man watches a mirror Perhaps he saw it, as m a mir-
ror, before it came Perhaps he did not, since if change,
flicker, there was m the sheriffs face it was no more than
a flicker But the Negro did not look back, there came only
into his face when die strap fell across his back a wince,
sudden, sharp, fleet, jerking up the comers of his mouth
and exposing his momentary teeth like smiling Then his
face smoothed again, inscrutable

“I reckon you amt tried hard enough to remember,” the
sheriff said

"I cant remember because I cant know,” the Negro said.



256

“I dont even live nowhere near here You ought to know
where I stay at, white folks "

"Mr Buford says you hve right down the road yonder/'
the sheriff said

"Lots of folks hve down that road Mr Buford ought to
know where I stay at ''

"Hes lying/' the deputy said His name was Buford He
was the one w 7 ho wielded the strap, buckle end outward
He held it poised He was watching the sheriffs face He
looked like a spaniel waiting to be told to spring into the
water

"Maybe so, maybe not/' the sheriff said He mused upon
the Negro He was still, huge, inert, sagging the cot springs
"I think he just dont realise yet that I amt playing Let
alone them folks out there that amt got no jail to put him
into if anything he wouldn't like should come up That
wouldn't bother to put him into a jail if they had one"
Perhaps there was a sign, a signal, m his eyes again, per-
haps not Peihaps the Negro saw it, perhaps not The strap
fell again, the buckle rakmg across the Negro's back "You
remember yet?” the sheriff said
"It's two white men/' the Negro said His voice was cold,
not sullen, not anything "I dont know who they is nor what
they does It amt none of my business I amt never seed
them I just heard talk about how two white men lived here
I didn't care who they was And, that's all I know You can
whup the blood outen me But that's all I know ”

Again the sheriff sighed "That'll do I reckon that's right ''
"It's that fellow Christmas, that used to work at the mill,
and another fellow named Brown/' the third man said "You
could have picked out any man m Jefferson that his breath
smelled right and he could have told you that much ”

"I reckon that's right, too/' the sheriff said
He returned to town When the crowd realised that the
sheriff was departing, a general exodus began It was as if



257

there were nothing left to look at now The body had gone,
and now the sheriff was going It was as though he carried
within him, somewhere withm that inert and sighing mass
of flesh, the secret itself that which mo\ ed and evoked
them as with a promise of something beyond the sluttish-
ness of stuffed entrails and monotonous days So there was
nothing left to look at now but the fire, they had now been
watching it for three hours They were now used to it, ac-
customed to it, now it had become a permanent part of
their lives as well as of their experiences, standing beneath
its windless column of smoke taller than and impregnable
as a monument which could be returned to at any time
So when the caravan reached town it had something of
that arrogant decorum of a procession behind a catafalque,
the sheriffs cai in the lead, the other cars honking and
blattmg behind m the sheriff 5 s and their own compounded
dust It was held up momentarily at a street intersection
near the squaie by a country wagon which had stopped
to let a passenger descend Looking out, the sheriff saw a
young woman climbing slowly and carefully down from
the wagon, with that careful awkwardness of advanced
pregnancy Then the wagon pulled aside, the caravan went
on, ciossmg the square, where already the cashier of the
bank had taken from the vault the envelope which the dead
woman had deposited with him and which bore the inscrip-
tion To be opened at my death Joanna Burden The cash-
ier was waiting at the sheriff’s office when the sheriff came
in, with the envelope and its contents This was a single
sheet of paper on which was written, by the same hand
which inscribed the envelope Notify E E Peebles , Attor

ney, Beale St, Memphis , Term , and Nathaniel Bur-

nngton, St Exeter , N H That was all

“This Peebles is a nigger lawyer/ 5 the cashier said

“Is that so?” the sheriff said

“Yes, What do you want me to do? 55



258

“I reckon you better do what the paper says/' the sheriff
said “I reckon maybe I better do it myself ” He sent two
wires He xeceived the Memphis reply m thirty minutes
The other came two hours later, within ten minutes after-
ward the word had gone through the town that Miss
Burden's nephew in New Hampshire offered a thousand
dollars' reward for the capture of her murderer At rune
o'clock that evening the man whom the countryman had
found in the burning house when he broke m the front
door appeared They did not know then that he was the
man He did not tell them so All they knew was that a
man who had resided for a short time m the town and
whom they knew as a bootlegger named Brown, and not
much of a bootlegger at that, appeared on the square m a
state of excitement, seeking the sheriff Then it began to
piece together The shenff knew that Brown was associ-
ated somehow with another man, another stranger named
Christmas about whom despite the fact that he had lived
in Jefferson for three yezxs } even less was known than about
Brown, it was only now that the sheriff learned that Christ-
mas had been living m the cabin behind Miss Burden's
house for three years Brown wanted to talk, he insisted
on talking, loud, urgent, it appeared at once that what he
was doing was claiming the thousand dollars' reward,

“You want to turn state's evidence?” the sheriff asked
him

“I dont want to turn nothing,” Brown said, harsh, hoarse,
a little wild in the face "X know who done it and when I
get my reward. I'll tell ”

“You catch the fellow that done it, and you'll get the
reward,” the shenff said So they took Brown to the jail for
safekeeping * Only I reckon it amt no actual need of that,”
the shenff said “I reckon as long as that thousand dollars is
where he can smell it, you couldn't run him away from
here ” When Brown was taken away, still hoarse, still ges-



259

ticulant and outraged, the sheriff telephoned to a neighbor-
ing town, where there was a pair of bloodhounds The dogs
would arrive on the early morning tram
About the bleak platform, in the sad dawn of that Sun-
day morning, thirty or forty men were waiting when the
tram came m, the lighted windows fleeing and jarring to a
momentary stop It was a fast tram and it did not always
stop at Jefferson It halted only long enough to disgorge
the two dogs a thousand costly tons of intricate and cun-
ous metal glaring and crashing up and into an almost
shocking silence filled with the puny sounds of men, to
vomit two gaunt and cringing phantoms whose droopeared
and mild faces gazed with sad abjectness about at the
weary, pale faces of men who had not slept very much
since night before last, ringing them about with something
terrible and eager and impotent It was as if the very initial
outrage of the murder carried in its wake and made of all
subsequent actions something monstrous and paradoxical
and wrong, m themselves against both reason and nature.
It was just sunrise when the posse reached the cabin
behind the charred and now cold embers of the house The
dogs, either gaming courage from the light and warmth of
the sun or catching the strained and tense excitement from
the men, began to surge and yap about the cabm Snuffing
loudly and as one beast they took a course, dragging the
man who held the leashes They ran side by side for a
hundred yards, where they stopped and began to dig furi-
ously mto the earth and exposed a pit where someone had
buried recently emptied food tms They dragged the dogs
away by mam strength They dragged them some dis-
tance from the cabm and made another cast For a short
time the dogs moiled, whimpering, then they set off again,
fulltongued, drooling, and dragged and earned the running
and cursing men at top speed back to the cabm, where,
feet planted and with backflung heads and bankrolled eye-



260

balls, they bayed the empty doorway with the passionate
abandon of two baritones singing Italian opera The men
took the dogs back to town, m cars, and fed them When
they crossed the square die church bells weie ringing, slow
and peaceful, and along the streets the decoious people
moved sedately beneath parasols, canymg Bibles and

a youth, a countryboy, and his father came m
to see die sheriff The boy told of having been on the way
home m a cai late Fuday night, and of a man who stopped
him a nnle or two beyond the scene of the murder, with
a pistol The boy believed that he was about to be robbed
and even killed, and he told how he was about to trick the
man into permitting him to drive right up into his own
front yard, where he intended to stop the car and spring
out and shout for help, hut that the man suspected some-
thing and forced him to stop the car and let him out The
father wanted to know how much of the thousand dollars
would become theirs

"Ton catch him and we’ll see,” the sheriff said So they
waked the dogs and put them into another car and the
youth showed them where the man had got out, and they
cast the dogs, who charged immediately into the woods
and with their apparent infallibility for metal m any form,
found the old pistol with its two loaded chambers almost
at once

“Its one of them old Civil War, cap-and-ball pistols,” the
deputy said “One of the caps has been snapped, but it never
went off What do you reckon he was doing with that?”

“Turn them dogs loose,” the sheriff said “Maybe them
leashes worry them ” They did so The dogs were free now,
thirty minutes later they were lost Not the men lost the
dogs, the dogs lost the men They were just across a small
creek and a ridge, and the men could hear them plainly
Tiiey were not baying now, with pride and assurance and


prayerbooks
That nigh



261

perhaps pleasure The sound which they now made was a
longdrawn and hopeless wailing, while steadily the men
shouted at them But apparently the animals could not hear
eithei Both voices were distinguishable, yet the bell-
like and abject wailing seemed to come from a single throat,
as though the two beasts crouched flank to flank After a
while the men found them so, crouched in a ditch By that
time their voices sounded almost like the voices of children
The men squatted there until it was light enough to find
their way back to the cars Then it was Monday morning

The temperature began to rise Monday On Tuesday, the
night, the darkness after the hot day, is close, still, oppres-
sive, as soon as Byron enters the house he feels the comers
of his nostrils whiten and tauten with the thick smell of the
stale, mankept house And when Hightower approaches,
the smell of plump unwashed flesh and unfresh clothing —
that odor of unfastidious sedentation, of static overflesh not
often enough bathed — is well nigh overpowering Entering,
Byron thinks as he has thought before ‘That is his right
It may not be my way, but it is his way and his right 9 And
he remembers how once he had seemed to find the answer
as though by inspiration, divination It is the odor of good-
ness Of course it would smell bad to us that are bad and
sinful 9

They sit again opposite one another m the study, the
desk, the lighted lamp, between Byron sits again on the
hard chair, his face lowered, still His voice is sober, stub
bom the voice of a man saying something which will be
not only unpleasmg, but will not be believed “I am going
to find another place for her A place where it will be more
private Where she can

Hightower watches his lowered face “Why must she
move? When she is comfortable there, with a woman at
hand if she should need one? 9 Byron does not answer He



262

sits motionless, downlooking, his face is stubborn, still,
looking at it, Hightower thinks. It is because so much hap-
pens Too much happens That’s it Man peiforms, engen-
ders, so much more than he can or should have to bear
That’s how he finds that he can bear anything That’s it
That’s what is so terrible That he can bear anything, any-
thing’ He watches Byron “Is Mrs Beard the only reason
why she is going to move?”

Still Byron does not look up, speaking m that still, stub-
born voice "She needs a place where it will be kind of
home to her She amt got a whole lot more time, and m a
boarding house, where it’s mostly just men A room
where it will be quiet when her time comes, and not every
dum horsetrader or courtjury that passes through the hall-
way

"I see,” Hightower says He watches Byrons face "And
you want me to take her in here ” Byron makes to speak,
but the other goes on his tone too is cold, level "It wont
do, Byron If there were another woman here, living m the
house It’s a shame too, with all the room here, the quiet
I’m thinking of her, you see Not myself I would not care
what was said, thought”

"I am not asking that ” Byron does not look up He can
feel the other watching him He thinks He knows that
is not what 1 meant , too He knows He just said that I
know what he is thinking I reckon I expected it I reckon
it is not any reason for him to think different from other
folks , even about me “I reckon you ought to know that ”
Perhaps he does know it But Byron does not look up to see
He talks on, m that dull, flat voice, downlooking, while be-
yond the desk Hightower, sitting a little more than erect,
looks at the thin, weatherhardened, laborpurged face of the
man opposite him "I amt going to get you mixed up in it
when it amt none of your trouble You haven’t even seen
W, and I dont reckon you ever will I reckon likely you



283

have never seen him to know it either Its just that I thought
maybe ” His voice ceases Across the desk the unbend-
ing minister looks at him, waiting, not offering to help him
“When it’s a matter of not-do, I reckon a man can trust him-
self for advice But when it comes to a matter of doing, I
reckon a fellow had better listen to all the advice he can
get But I amt going to mix you up in it I dont want you to
worry about that ”

"I think I know that/" Hightower says He watches the
other s downlookmg face 1 am not m life any more/ he
thinks That's why there is no use in even trying to med-
dle, interfere He could hear me no more than that man
and that woman (ay, and that child) would hear or heed
me if I tried to come back mto life ’ Tut you told me she
knows that he is here ”

"Yes,” Byron says, brooding "Out there where I thought
the chance to harm ere a man or woman or child could not
have found me And she hadn’t hardly got there before I
had to go and blab the whole thing ”

T dont mean that You didn’t know yourself, then I
mean, the rest of it About him and the — that It has
been three days She must know, whether you told her or
not She must have heard by now”

"Christmas ” Byron does not look up T never said any
more, after she asked about that little white scar by his
mouth All the time we were commg to town that evening
I was afraid she would ask I would try to think up tilings
to talk to her about so she would not have a chance to ask
me any more And all the time I thought I was keepmg h et
from finding out that he had not only run off and left h et
in trouble, he had changed his name to keep her from find-
ing him, and that now when she found him at last, what
she had found was a bootlegger, she already knew it A1
ready knew that he was a nogood” He says now, with a
land of musing astonishment "I never even had any need



264

to keep it from her, to lie it smooth It was like she knew
beforehand what I would say, that I was going to lie to
her Like she had already thought of that herself, and that
she already didn’t believe it before I even said it, and that
was all right too But the part of her that knew the truth,
*hat I could not have fooled anyway ” He fumbles,
gropes, the unbending man beyond the desk watching him,
not offering to help "lt ? s like she was in two parts, and one
of them knows that he is a scoundrel But the other part
believes that when a man and a woman aie going to have
a child, that the Lord will see that they are all together
when the right time comes Like it was God that looks
after women, to protect them from men And if the Lord
dont see fit to let them two parts meet and kind of com-
pare, then I amt going to do it either”

“Nonsense,” Hightower says He looks acioss the desk at
the othei’s still, stubborn, ascetic face the face of a hermit
who has lived for a long time m an empty place where sand
blows “The thing, the only thing, for her to do is to go
back to Alabama To her people ”

“I reckon not,” Byron says He says it immediately, with
immediate finality, as if he has been waiting all the while
foi this to be said “She wont need to do that I reckon she
wont need to do that” But he does not look up He can
feel the other looking at him
“Does Bu — Brown know that she is m Jefferson?”

For an mstant Byron almost smiles His lip lifts a thin
movement almost a shadow, without mirth “He’s been too
oasy After that thousand dollars It’s right funny to watch
him Like a man that cant play a tune, blowing a horn
right loud, hoping that m a mmute it will begin to make
music Bemg drug across the square on a handcuff every
twelve or fifteen hours, when likely they couldn’t run him
away if they was to sic them bloodhounds on him He
spent Saturday night m jail, still talking about how they



265

were trying to beat him out of his thousand dollars by try-
ing to make out that he helped Christmas do the lolling,
until at last Buck Conner went up to his cell and told him
he would put a gag m his mouth if he didn’t shut up and
let the other prisoners sleep And he shut up, and Sunday
night they went out with die dogs and he raised so much
racket that they had to take him out of ]ail and let him go
too But the dogs never got started And him hollering and
cussmg the dogs and wantmg to beat them because they
never struck a trail, telling everybody again how it was him
that reported Christmas first and that all he wanted was
fair justice, until the sheriff took him aside and talked to
him They didn’t know what the sheriff said to him Maybe
he threatened to lock him back up in jail and not let him go
with them next time Anyway, he calmed down some, and
they went on They never got back to town until late Mon-
day night He was still quiet Maybe he was wore out
He hadn’t slept none m some time, and they said how he was
trying to outrun the dogs so that the sheriff finally threat
ened to handcuff him to a deputy to keep him back so the
dogs could smell something beside him He needed a shave
already when they locked him up Saturday night, and he
needed one bad by now X reckon he must have looked
more like a murderer than even Christmas And he was
cussing Christmas now, like Christmas had done hid out
just for meanness, to spite him and keep him from getting
that thousand dollars And they brought him back to jail
and locked him up that night And this morning they went
and took him out again and they all went off with the dogs,
on a new scent Folks said they could hear him hollering
and talking until they were clean out of town ”

"And she doesn’t know that, you say You say you have
kept that from her You had rather that she knew h im to
be a scoundrel than a foob is that it?”

Byron’s face is still again, not smiling now, it is quite



266

sober "I dont know It was last Sunday night, after I came
out to talk to you and went back home I thought she
would be asleep m bed, but she was still sitting up m the
parlor, and she said, What is it? What has happened here?’
And I didn’t look at her and I could feel her looking at me
I told her it was a nigger killed a white woman I didn’t he
then I reckon I was so glad I never had to lie then Because
before I thought, I had done said 'and set the house afire ’
And then it was too late I had pointed out the smoke, and
I had told her about the two fellows named Brown and
Christmas that lived out there And I could feel her watch-
ing me the same as I can you now, and she said, 'What
was the nigger’s name‘s It’s like God sees that they find out
what they need to know out of men s lying, without need-
ing to ask And that they dont find out what they dont
need to know, without even knowing they have not found
it out And so I dont know for sure what she knows and
what she dont know Except that I have kept it from her
that it was the man she is hunting for that told on the mur-
derer and that he is m ]ail now except when he is out
running with dogs the man that took him up and befriended
him I have kept that from her”

"And what are you going to do now? Where does she
want to move?”

"She wants to go out there and wait for him I told her
that he is away on business for the sheriff So I didn’t lie
altogether She had already asked me where he lived and
I had already told her Am d she said that was the place
where she belonged until he came back, because that is his
house She said that’s what he would want her to do And
I couldn’t tell her different, that that cabm is the last place
in the world he would want her to ever see She wanted to
go out there as soon as I got home from the mill this eve-
ning She had her bundle all tied up and hex bonnet on ?
waiting for me to get home 1 started once to go on by



267

myself/ she said "But I wasn't sho I knowed the way
And I said ‘Yes, only it was too late today and we would
go out there tomorrow, and she said, ‘If s a hour till dark
yet It amt but two miles, is it?’ and I said to let’s wait be-
cause I would have to ask first, and she said, ‘Ask who?
Aint it Lucas's house?’ and I could feel her watching me
and she said, 1 thought you said that that was where Lucas
lived/ and she was watching me and she said, ‘Who is this
preacher you keep on going to talk to about me? *

“And you are going to let her go out there to live?”

“It might be best She would be private out there, and
she would be away from all the talking until this business
is over”

“You mean, she has got her rnmd set on it, and you wont
stop her You dont want to stop her ”

Byron does not look up “In a way, it is his house The
mghest thing to a home of his own he will ever own, I
reckon And he is her ”

“Out there alone, with a child coming The nearest house
a few Negro cabins a half mile away” He watches Byrons
face

“I have thought of that There are ways, things that can
be done

“What things? What can you do to protect her out
there?”

Byron does not answer at once, he does not look up*
When he speaks his voice is dogged “There are secret
things a man can do without being evil. Reverend No mat-
ter how they might look to folks ”

“I dont think that you could do anything that would bo
very evil, Byron, no matter how it looked to folks But are
you gomg to undertake to say just how far evil extends into
the appearance of evil? just where between domg and ap-
pearing evil stops?”

“No/’ Byron says Then he moves slightly, he speaks as



268

if he too were waking “I hope not I reckon I am trying
to do the right thing by my lights ” — "And that/ Hightower
thinks, "is the first lie he ever told me Ever told anyone,
man or woman, perhaps including himself * He looks across
the desk at the stubborn, dogged, sobei face that has not yet
looked at him "Or maybe it is not he yet because he does
not know himself that it is so * He says

""Well ” He speaks now with a kind of spurious brusque-
ness which, flabbyjowled and darkcaverneyed, his face be-
lies ""That is settled, then You'll take her out there, to his
house, and you'll see that she is comfortable and youll see
that she is not disturbed until this is over And then you 11
tell that man — Bunch, Brown — that she is here ”

""And he'll run/' Byron says He does not look up, yet
through him there seems to go a wave of exultation, of tri-
umph, before he can curb and hide it, when it i« too late to
try For the moment he does not attempt to curb it, back
thrust too m his hard chair, looking for the first time at the
minister, with a face confident and bold and suffused The
other meets his gaze steadily

""Is that what you want him to do?” Hightower says
They sit so in the lamplight Through the open wmdow
comes the hot, myriad silence of tire breathless night
""Think what you are doing You are attempting to come
between man and wife”

Byron has caught himself His face is no longer tri-
umphant But he looks steadily at the older man Perhaps
he tried to catch his voice too But he cannot yet ""They amt
man and wife yet,” he says

""Does she think that? Do you believe that she will say
that?” They look at one another "‘Ah, Byron, Byron What
are a few mumbled words before God, before the steadfast-
ness of a woman s nature? Before that child?”

""Well, he may not run If he gets that reward, that



269

money Like enough he will be drunk enough on a thou-
sand dollars to do anything, even marry ”

“Ah, Byron, Byron ”

“Then what do you think we — I ought to do? What
do you advise?”

“Go away Leave Jefferson” They look at one another
“No,” Hightower says “You dont need my help You are
already being helped by someone stronger than I am ”

For a moment Byron does not speak They look at one
anothei, steadily “Helped by who?”

“By the devil,” Hightower says

‘And the devil is looking after him, too/ Hightower
thinks He is m midstride, halfway home, his laden small
market basket on his arm ‘Him, too Him, too/ he thinks,
walking It is hot He is m his shirt sleeves, tall, with thin
blaekclad legs and spare, gaunt arms and shoulders, and
with that flabby and obese stomach like some monstrous
pregnancy The shirt is white, but it is not fresh, his collar
is soiled, as is the white lawn cravat carelessly knotted, and
he has not shaved for two or three days His panama hat is
soiled, and beneath it, between hat and skull against the
heat, the edge and comers of a soiled handkerchief pro-
trude He has been to town to do his semiweekly marketing,
where, gaunt, misshapen, with his gray stubble and his dark
spectacleblurred eyes and his blackrimmed hands and the
rank manoaor of his sedentary and unwashed flesh, he en-
tered the one odorous and cluttered store which he patron-
ised and paid with cash for what he bought

“Well, they found that nigger's trail at last,” the pro-
prietor said

“Negro?” Hightower said He became utterly still, m the
act of putting into his pocket the change from Ins purchases

“That bah — fellow, the murderer I said all the time



270

that he wasn t right Wasn’t a white man That there was
something funny about him But you cant tell folks nothing
until — M

"Found him?” Hightower said

"You durn right they did Why, the fool never even had
sense enough to get out of the county Here the sheriff has
been telephoning all over the country for him, and the
black son — uh was right here under his durn nose all
the time ”

"And they have ” He leaned forward against the
counter, above his laden basket He could feel the counter
edge against his stomach It felt solid, stable enough, it
was more like the earth itself were rocking family, prepar-
ing to move Then it seemed to move, like something re-
leased slowly and without haste, m an augmenting swoop,
and cleverly, since the eye was tricked into believing that
the dingy shelves ranked with flyspecked tins, and the
merchant himself behind the counter, had not moved, out-
raging, tricking sense And he thinking, T wont! I wont!
I have bought immunity I have paid I have paid *

"They amt caught him yet,” the proprietor said "But
they will The sheriff taken the dogs out to the church
before daylight this morning They amt six hours behind
him To think that the durn fool never had no better
sense show he is a nigger, even if nothing else

Then the proprietor was saying, "Was that all today?”

"What?” Hightower said "What?”

"Was that all you wanted?”

<4 Yes Yes That was * He began to fumble m his
pocket, the proprietor watching him His hand came forth,
still fumbling It blundered upon the counter, shedding
corns The proprietor stopped two or three of them as they
were about to roll off the counter



271


"What's this for?' 5 the proprietor said

"For the w Hightower's hand fumbled at the laden
basket "For — 55

“You already paid” The proprietor was watching him,
curious "Thats your change here, that I just gave you For
the dollar bill ”

"Oh” Hightower said "Yes I * . I just—” The mer-
chant was gathering up the coins He handed them back
When the customer s hand touched his it felt like ice

"Its this hot weather/ 5 the proprietor said "It does wear
a man out Do you want to set down a spell before you
start borne?” But Hightower apparently did not hear him
He was moving now, toward the door, while the merchant
watched him He passed through the door and mto the
street, the basket on his arm, walking stiffly and carefully,
like a man on ice It was hot, heat quivered up from the
asphalt, givmg to the familiar buildings about the square a
nimbus quality, a quality of living and palpitant chiaro-
scuro Someone spoke to him m passing, he did not even
know it He went on, thinking And him too And him too
walking fast now, so that when he turned the comer at
last and entered that dead and empty little street where his
dead and empty small house waited, he was almost pant-
ing It's the heat, 5 the top of his mind was saying to him,
reiterant, explanatory* But still, even in the quiet street
where scarce anyone ever paused now to look at, remember,
the sign, and his house, fits sanctuary, already m sight, it
goes on beneath the top of his mind that would cozen and
soothe him 1 wont I wont I have bought immunity 5 It
is like words spoken aloud now reiterative, patient, justi-
ficative T paid for it I didn't quibble about the price
No man can say that I just wanted peace, I paid them their
price without quibbling 7 The street shimmers and swims,
he has been sweating, but now even the air of noon feels



272

cool upon him Then sweat, heat, mirage, all, rushes fused
into a finality which abrogates all logic and justification
and obliterates it like fire would I will notf I will nor

When, sitting m the study window m the first dark, he
saw Byron pass mto and then out of the street lamp, he
sat suddenly forward m his chair It was not that he was
surprised to see Byron there, at that hour At first, when
he fiist recognised the figure, he thought Ah I had an
idea he would come tonight It is not m him to support
even the semblance of evil It was while he was thinking
that that he started, sat forward for an instant after jecog-
msing the approaching figure in the full glare of the light
he believed that he was mistaken, knowing all the while
that he could not be, that it could be no one except Byron,
since he was already turning into the gate

Tonight Byron is completely changed It shows m his
walk, his carriage, leanmg forward Hightower says to him-
self As though he has learned pride , or defiance Byron’s
head is erect, he walks fast and erect, suddenly Hightower
says, almost aloud 'He has done something He has taken
a step * He makes a clicking sound with his tongue, leanmg
m the dark window, watching the figure pass swiftly from
sight beyond the window and in the direction of the porch,
the entrance, and where in the next moment Hightower
hears his feet and then his knock 'And he didn t offer to
tell me,’ he thinks 1 would have listened, let him think
aloud to me > He is already crossing the room, pausing at
the desk to turn on the light He goes to the front door

"It’s me, Reverend,” Byron says

"I recognised you,” Hightower says "Even though you
didn’t stumble on the bottom step this time You have
entered this house on Sunday night, but until tonight you
We never entered it without stumbling on the bottom
step, Byron ” This was the note upon which Byron’s calls



273

usually opened tins faintly overbearing note of levity and
warmth to put the other at his ease, and on the part of
the caller that slow and countrybred diffidence which is
courtesy Sometimes it would seem to Hightower that he
would actually hale Byron into the house by a judicious
application of pure breath, as though Byron wore a sail

But this time Byron is already entering, before High-
tower has finished his sentence He jnters immediately,
with that new air bom somewhere between assurance and
defiance "And I reckon you are going to find that you
hate it worse when I dont stumble than when I do,” Byron
says

"Is that a hope, or is it a threat, Byron?”

"Well, I dont mean it to be a threat,” Byron says

"Ah,” Hightower says "In other words, you can offer
no hope Well, I am forewarned, at least I was forewarned
as soon as I saw you m the street hght But at least you are
going to tell me about it What you have already done,
even if you didn’t see fit to talk about it beforehand”
* They are moving toward the study door Byron stops, he
looks back and up at the taller face

Then you know,” he says "You have already heard”
Then, though his head has not moved, he is no longer
looking at the other "Well,” he says He says "Well, any
man has got a free tongue Woman too But I would like
to know who told you Not that I am ashamed Not that I
armed to keep it from you I come to tell you myself, when
I could”

They stand just without the door to the lighted room
Hightower sees now that Byron’s arms are laden with
bundles, parcels that look like they might contam groceries
"What?” Hightower says "What have you come to tel
me? — But come m Maybe I do know what it is already
But I want to see your face when you tell me I forewarn
you too, Byron ” They enter the lighted room The bundles



274

are groceries he has bought and carried too many like
them himself not to know "Sit down/' he says

“No,” Byron says “I amt going to stay that long ” He
stands, sober, contained, with that air compassionate still,
but decisive without being assured, confident without being
assertive that air of a man about to do something which
someone dear to him will not understand and approve, yet
which he himself knows to be right just as he knows that
the fnend will never see it so He says "You amt going to
like it But there amt anything else to do I wish you could
see it so But I reckon you cant And I reckon that's all there
is to it ”

Across the desk, seated again, Hightower watches him
gravely "What have you done, Byron?”

Byron speaks m that new voice that voice brief, terse,
each word definite of meaning, not fumbling "I took her
out there this evenmg I had already fixed up the cabin,
cleaned it good She is settled now She wanted it so It
was the nearest thing to a home he ever had and ever will
have, so I reckon she is entitled to use it, especially as the
owner amt usmg it now Being detained elsewhere, you
might say I know you amt going to like it You can name
lots of reasons, good ones Youll say it amt his cabin to
give to her All right Maybe it amt But it amt any living
man or woman m this country or state to say she cant use it
Youll say that m her shape she ought to have a woman
With her All right There is a nigger woman, one old
enough to be sensible, that dont live over two hundred
yards away She can call to her without getting up from
the chair or the bed Youll say, hut that amt a white
woman And 111 ask you what will she he getting from the
white women in Jefferson about the time that baby is due,
when here she amt been m Jefferson but a week and a 1~
ready she cant talk to a woman ten minutes before that
Woman knows she amt married yet, and as long as that



275

dum scoundrel stays above ground where she can hear of
him now and then, she amt going to be married How
much help will she be getting from the white ladies about
that time 0 Theyll see that she has a bed to lay on and walls
to hide her from the street all right I dont mean that And
I reckon a man would be justified m saying she dont de-
serve no more than that, being as it wasn't behind no walls
that she got in the shape she is m But that baby never done
the choosing And even if it had, I be dum if any poor little
tyke, having ro face what it will have to face m this world,
deserves — deserves more than — better than — But x reckon
you know what I mean I reckon you can even say it”
Beyond the desk Hightower watches him while he talks in
that level, restrained tone, not onee at a loss for words un-
til he came to something still too new and nebulous for
him to more than feel “And for the third reason A white
woman out there alone You amt going to like that You
will like that least of all”

“Ah, Byron, Byron”

Byron's voice is now dogged Yet he holds his head up
still “I amt m the house with her I got a tent It amt close,
neither Just where I can hear her at need And I fixed a
bolt on the door Any of them can come out, at any time,
and see me m the tent ”

“Ah, Byron, Byron ”

“I know you amt thinking what most of them think
Are thinking I know you would know better, even if she
wasn't — if it wasn't for — I know you said that because of
what you know that the others will think ”

Hightower sits agam in the attitude of the eastern idol,
between his parallel arms on the armrests of the chair “Go
away, Byron Go away Now At once Leave this place for-
ever, this terrible place, this terrible, terrible place I can
read you You will tell me that you have just learned lovej
I will tell you that you have just learned hope That's all,



276

hope The object does not matter, not to the hope, not even
to you There is but one end to this, to the road that you are
taking sin or marriage And you would refuse the sm
That s it, God forgive me It will, must be, marriage or
nothing with you And you will insist that it be marriage
You will convince her, perhaps you already have, if she but
knew it, would admit it else, why is she content to stay
here and vet make no effort to see the man whom she has
come to find? I cannot say to you. Choose the sm, be-
cause you would not onl) hate me you would carry that
hatred straight to her So I say. Go away Now At once
Turn your face now, and dont look back But not this,
Byron *

They look at one another “I knew you would not like
it,” Byron says “I reckon I done right not to make myself a
guest by sitting down But I did not expect this That you
too would turn against a woman wronged and betrayed — w

“No woman who has a child is ever betrayed, the hus-
band of a mother, whether he be the father or not, is al-
ready a cuckold Give yourself at least the one chance m
ten, Byron If you must marry, there are single women,
girls, virgins Its not fair that you should sacrifice yourself
to a woman who has chosen once and now wishes to renege
that choice It’s not right It’s not just God didn t intend
it so when He made marriage Made it? Women made
marriage ”

“Sacrifice? Me the sacrifice? It seems to me the sacn-
> »

*dce —

“Not to her For the Lena Groves there are always two
men m the world and their number is legion Lucas
Burches and Byron Bunches But no Lena, no woman, de-
serves more than one of them No woman There have been
good women who were martyrs to brutes, in their cups and
such But what woman, good or bad, has ever suffered from



277

any brute as men have suffered from good women? Tell me
ttat, Byron”

They speak quietly without heat, giving pause to weigh
one another’s words, as two men already impregnable each
in his own conviction will “I reckon you are right,” Byron
S3ys "Anyway, it amt for me to say that you are wrong
And I dont reckon it’s for you to say that I am wrong, even
if I am”

"No,” Hightower says

"Even if I am,” Byron says "So I reckon I’ll say good
night ” He says, quietly "It’s a good long walk out there ”

"Yes,” Hightower says "I used to walk it myself, now
and then It must be about three miles ”

"Two miles,” Byron says "Well” He turns Hightower
does not move Byron shifts the parcels which he has not
put down "I’ll say good night,” he says, moving toward
the door “I reckon I’ll see you, sometime soon ”

"Yes,” Hightower says "Is there anything I can do?
Anything you need? bedclothes and such?”

"I’m obliged I reckon she has a plenty There was some
already there I’m obliged ”

“And you will let me know? If anything comes up If
the child — Have you arranged for a doctor?”

"Til get that attended to ”

"But have you seen one yet? Have you engaged one?”

* I aim to see to all that And I’ll let you know ”

Then he is gone From the window again Hightower
watches him pass and go on up the street, toward the edge
of town and his two mile walk, carrying his paper-wrapped
packages of food He passed from sight walking erect and
at a good gait, such a gait as an old man already gone to
flesh and short wind, an old man who has already spent too
much time sitting down, could not have kept up with And
Hightower leans there m the window, m the August heat.



278

oblivious of the odor m which he lives — that smell of people
who no longer live in life that odor of overplump desicca-
tion and stale linen as though a precursor of the tomb — lis-
tening to the feet which he seems to hear still long after he
knows that he cannot, thinking, ‘God bless him God help
him 5 , thinking To he young To he young There is nothing
else like it there is nothing else m the world He is tlnnkmg
quietly ‘I should not have got out of the habit of prayer 7
Then he hears the feet no longer He hears now only the myr-
iad and interminable insects, leaning m the window, breath-
ing the hot still rich maculate smell of the earth, thinking of
how when he was young, a youth, he had loved darkness,
of walking or sitting alone among trees at night Then the
ground, the bark of trees, became actual, savage, filled
with, evocative of, strange and baleful half delights and
half terrors He was afraid of it He feared, he loved m
bemg afraid Then one day while at the seminary he
realised that he was no longer afraid It was as though a
door had shut somewhere He was no longer afraid of
darkness He just hated it, he would flee from it, to walls,
to artificial light T es/ he thinks 1 should never have let
myself get out of the habit of prayer 5 He turns from the
window One wall of the study is lined with books He
pauses before them, seeking, until he finds the one which
he wants It is Tennyson It is dogeared He has had it ever
smee the seminary He sits beneath the lamp and opens it
It does not take long Soon the fine galloping language,
the gutless swooning full of sapless trees and dehydrated
lusts begins to swim smooth and swift and peaceful
It is better than praying without having to bother to think
aloud It is like listening in a cathedral to a eunuch chant-
ing in a language which he does not even need to not
understand



14


“there’s somebody out there in that cabin/’ the deputy
told the sheriff “Not hiding living in it”

“Go and see/’ the sheriff said

The deputy went and returned

“It’s a woman A young woman And she’s all fixed up
to live there a good spell, it looks like And Byron Bunch
is camped m a tent about as far from the cabin as from
here to the post-office ”

“Byron Bunch?” the sheriff says “Who is the woman?”

“I dont know She is a stranger A young woman She
told me all about it* She begun telling me almost before I
got inside the cabin, like it was a speech Like she had done
got used to telling it, done got into the habit And I reckon
she has, coming here from over in Alabama somewhere,
looking for her husband He had done come on ahead of
her to find work, it seems like, and after a while she started
out after him and folks told her on the road that he was
here And about that time Byron come m and he said he
could tell me about it Said be aimed to tell you ”

“Byron Bunch,” the sheriff says

“Yes,” the deputy says He says “She’s fixing to have a
kid It amt going to be long, neither”

279



280

“A lad? 9 the sheriff says He looks at the deputy “And
from Alabama From anywhere You cant tell me that
about Byron Bunch "

“No more am I trying to,” the deputy says “I amt saying
it’s Byron's Leastways, Byron amt saying it’s his I'm just
telling you what he told me ”

“Oh,” the sheriff says “I see Why she is out there So
it’s one of them fellows It's Christmas, is it?’ 7

“No This is what Byron told me He took me outside
and told me, where she couldn't hear He said he aimed to
come and tell you It's Brown's Only his name amt Brown
It's Lucas Burch Byron told me About how Brown or
Burch left her over m Alabama Told her he was just com-
ing to find work and fix up a home and then send for her
But her time come nigh and she hadn't heard from him,
where he was at or anything, so she just decided to not
wait any longer She started out afoot, asking along the
road if anybody knowed a fellow named Lucas Burch, get-
ting a nde here and there, asking everybody she met if
they knew him And so after a while somebody told her
how there was a fellow named Burch or Bunch or some-
thing working at the planmg mill m Jefferson, and she come
on here She got here Saturday, on a wagon, while we were
all out at the murder, and she come out to the mill and
found it was Bunch instead of Burch And Byron said he
told her that her husband was m Jefferson before he knew
it And then he said she had him pmned down and he had
to tell her where Brown lived But he amt told her that
Brown or Burch is mixed up with Christmas m this killing
He just told her that Brown was away on busmess And I
reckon you can call it busmess Work, anyway I never saw
a man want a thousand dollars badder and suffer more to
get it, than him And so she said that Browns house was
bound to be the one that Lucas Burch had promised to get
ready for her to live in, and so she moved out to wait until



281

Brown come back from tins here business he is away on
Byron said he couldn't stop her because he didn't want to
tell her the truth about Brown after he had already lied
to her in a way of speaking He said he aimed to come and
tell you about it before now, only you found it out too
quick, before he had got her settled down good ”

“Lucas Burch?” the sheriff says

“I was some surprised, myself ” the deputy says “What
do you aim to do about it?”

“Nothing,” the sheriff says “I reckon they wont do no
harm out there And it amt none of my house to tell her
to get out of it And like Byron told her, Burch or Brown
or whatever his name is, is going to be right busy fox a
while longer yet”

“Do you aim to tell Brown about her?”

“I reckon not ” the sheriff says “It amt any of my busi
ness I amt interested m the wives he left m Alabama, or
anywhere else What I am mterested in is the husband he
seems to have had smce he come to Jefferson ”

The deputy guffaws “I reckon that's a fact,” he says
He sobers, muses “If he dont get that thousand dollars, I
reckon he will just die ”

“I reckon he wont,” the sheriff says

At three o'clock Wednesday morning a Negro rode into
town on a saddleless mule He went to the sheriffs home
and waked him He had come direct from a Negro church
twenty miles away, where a revival meeting was m nightly
progress On the evening before, in the middle of a hymn,
there had come a tremendous noise from the rear of the
church, and turning the congregation saw a man standing
in the door The door had not been locked or even shut
yet the man had apparently grasped it by the knob and
hurled it back into the wall so that the sound crashed into
the blended voices like a pistol shot Then the man came



282

swiftly up the aisle, where the singing had stopped short
off, toward the pulpit where the preacher leaned, his hands
still raised, his mouth still open Then they saw that the
man was white In the thick, cavehke gloom which the
two oil lamps but served to mcrease, they could not tell at
once what he was until he was halfway up the aisle Then
they saw that his face was not black, and a woman began
to shnek, and people m the rear sprang up and began to
run toward the door, and another woman on the mourn-
ers’ bench, already m a semihystencal state, sprang up and
whirled and glared at him for an instant with white rolling
eyes and screamed, “It's the deviU It's Satan himself!” Then
she ran, quite blind She ran straight toward him and he
knocked her down without stopping and stepped over her
and went on, with the faces gaped for screaming falling
away before him, straight to the pulpit and put his hand
on the minister

'Wasn't nobody bothering him, even then,” the messen-
ger said "It was all happening so fast, and nobody knowed
him, who he was or what he wanted or nothing And the
women hollering and screeching and him done retch into
the pulpit and caught Brother Bedenberry by the throat,
trying to snatch him outen the pulpit We could see Brother
Bedenberry talking to him, trying to pacify him quiet, and
him jerking at Brother Bedenberry and slappmg his face
with his hand And the womenfolks screeching and Holler-
ing so you couldn't hear what Brother Bedenberry was say-
ing, cep he never tried to hit back nor nothing, and then
some of the old men, the deacons, went up to him and tried
to talk to him and he let Brother Bedenberry go and he
whirled and he knocked seventy year old Pappy Thompson
clean down into the mourners' pew and then he retch down
and caught up a chair and whirled and made a pass at the
others until they give back And the folks still yelling and
screeching and trying to get out Then he turned and dumb



283

into the pulpit, where Brother Bedenberry had done dumb
out the other side, and he stood there — he was all muddy,
his pants and his shirt, and his jaw black with whiskers —
with his hands raised like a preacher And he begun to
curse, hollering it out, at the folks, and he cursed God
louder than the women screeching, and some of the
men trying to hold Roz Thompson, Pappy Thompsons
daughters boy, that was six foot tall and had a razor nek-
lad in his hand, hollering, Til kill him Lemme go, folks
He hit my grandpappy 111 kill him Lemme go Please
lemme go/ and the folks trying to get out, rushing and
tromphng in the aisle and through the door, and him m
the pulpit cursing God and the men dragging Roz Thomp-
son out backwards and Roz still begging them to let him
go But they got Roz out and we went back into the bushes
and him still hollering and cursmg back there in the pulpit
Then he quit after a while and we seed him come to the
door and stand there And they had to hold Roz agam
He must have heard the racket they made holding Roz,
because he begun to laugh He stood there in the door,
with the light behind him, laughing loud, and then he be-
gun to curse agam and we could see him snatch up a bench
leg and swing it hack And we heard the first lamp bust, and
it got dim in the church, and then we heard the other lamp
bust and then it was dark and we couldn’t see him no more
And where they was trying to hold Roz a terrible racket
set up, with them hollerwhispermg, ‘Hold him* Hold him!
Ketch him! Ketch him! 3 Then somebody hollered. Tie's
done got loose/ and we could hear Roz running back to-
ward the church and Deacon Vines says to me, ‘Roz will
loll him Jump on a mule and ride for the sheriff Tell him
just what you seen 3 And wasn't nobody bothering him,
captain/ 3 the Negro said “We never even knowed him to
call his name Never even seed him before And we tried to
hold Roz back But Roz a big man, and him done knocked



284

down Roz’ seventy year old grandpappy and Roz with that
nekkid razor in his hand, not caring much who else he had
to cut to carve his path back to the church where that
white man was But ’fore God we tried to hold Roz ”

That was what he told, because that was what he knew
He had departed immediately he did not know that at
the time he was telling it, the Negro Roz was lying uncon-
scious in a neighboring cabin, with his skull fractured
where Christmas, just mside the now dark door, had struck
him with the bench leg when Roz plunged into the church
Christmas struck just once, hard, savagely, at the sound
of running feet, the thick shape which rushed headlong
through the doorway, and heard it without pause plunge
on crashing among the overturned benches and become
still. Also without pausing Christmas sprang out and to
the earth, where he stood lightly poised, still grasping the
bench leg, cool, not even breathing hard He was quite
cool, no sweat, the darkness cool upon him The church-
yard was a pallid crescent of trampled and beaten earth,
shaped and enclosed by undergrowth and trees He knew
that the undergrowth was full of Negroes he could feel the
eyes "Looking and looking/ he thought Dont even know
they cant see me 3 He breathed deeply, he found that he
was hefting the bench leg, curiously, as though trying its
balance, as if he had never touched it before TU cut a
notch in it tomorrow/ he thought He leaned the leg care-
fully against the wall beside him and took from his shirt
a cigarette and a match As he struck the match he paused,
and with the yellow flame spurting pumly into life he stood,
his head turned a little It was hooves which he heard He
heard them come alive and grow swift, diminishing “A
mule/’ he said aloud, not loud TBound for town with the
good news” He lit the cigarette and flipped the match
away and he stood there, smoking, feeling the Negro eyes
upon the tiny living coal Though he stood there until the



285

cigarette was smoked down, he was quite alert He had
set his back agamst the wall and he held the bench leg m
his right hand again He smoked the cigarette completely
down, then he flipped it, twinkling, as far as he could
toward the undergrowth where he could feel the Negroes
crouching "Have a butt, boys,” he said, his voice sudden
and loud m the silence In the undergrowth where they
crouched they watched the cigarette twinkle toward the
earth and glow there for a time But they could not see him
when he departed, nor which way he went

At eight o’clock the next morning the sheriff arrived, with
his posse and the bloodhounds They made one capture
immediately, though the dogs had nothing to do with it
The church was deserted, there was not a Negro m sight
The posse entered the church and looked quietly about
at the wreckage Then they emerged The dogs had struck
something immediately, but before they set out a deputy
found, wedged into a split plank on the side of the church,
a scrap of paper It had been obviously put there by the
hand of man, and opened, it proved to be an empty ciga-
rette container tom open and spread smooth, and on the
white mner side was a pencilled message It was raggedly
written, as though by an unpractised hand or perhaps i n
the dark, and it was not long It was addressed to the sher-
iff by name and it was unprintable — a smgle phrase — and
it was unsigned "Didn’t I tell you?” one of the party said
He was unshaven too and muddy, like the quarry which
they had not yet even seen, and his face looked strained
and a little mad, with frustration, outrage, and his voice
was hoarse, as though he had been doing a good deal of
unheeded shouting or talking recently "I told you all the
tune* I told you!”

"Told me what?” the sheriff said, in a cold, level voice,
bearing upon the other a gaze cold and level, the pencilled
message m h\s hand "What did you tell me when?” The



286

other looked at the sheriff, outraged, desperate, frayed
almost to endurance’s limit, looking at him, the deputy
thought. If he dont get that reward, he will just die 9 His
mouth was open though voiceless as he glared at the sheriff
with a land of baffled and unbelieving amaze “And I done
told you, too,” the sheriff said, m his bleak, quiet voice, “if
you dont like the way I am running this, you can wait back
in town There’s a good place there for you to wait in Cool,
where you wont stay so heated up like out here m the sun
Amt I told you, now? Talk up ”

The other closed his mouth He looked away, as though
with a tremendous effort, as though with a tremendous ef-
fort he said “Yes” in a dry, suffocated voice
The sheriff turned heavily, crumpling the message “You
try to keep that from slipping your mind agam, then,” he
said £c If you got any mind to even slip on you ” They were
ringed about with quiet, interested faces in the early sun-
light “About which I got the Lord’s own doubts, if you or
anybody else wants to know” Someone guffawed, once
“Shet up that noise,” the sheriff said “Let’s get going Get
them dogs started, Bufe ”

The dogs were cast, still on leash They struck immedi-
ately The trail was good, easily followed because of the
dew The fugitive had apparently made no effort whatever
to hide it They could even see the prints of his knees and
hands where he had knelt to drink from a spring “I never
yet knew a murderer that had more sense than that about
the folks that would chase him,” the deputy said “But this
durn fool dont even suspect that we might use dogs ”

“We been putting dogs on him once a day ever since
Sunday,” the sheriff said “And we amt caught him yet”
“Them were cold trails We amt had a good hot trail un-
til today But he’s made his mistake at last Well get him.
today Before noon, maybe ”

“I’ll wait and see, I reckon,” the sheriff said



287

“You’ll see/’ the deputy said “This trail is running
straight as a railroad I could follow it, myself almost Look
here You can even see his footprints The dum fool amt
even got enough sense to get mto the road, in the dust,
where other folks have walked and where the dogs cant
scent him Them dogs will find the end of them footprints
before ten o’clock”

Which the dogs did Presently the trail bent sharply at
right angles They followed it and came onto a road, which
they followed behind the lowheaded and eager dogs who,
after a short distance, swung to the roadside where a path
came down from a cotton house m a nearby field They be-
gan to bay, milling, tugging, their voices loud, mellow, ring-
ing, whining and surging with excitement “Why, the dura
fool!” the deputy said “He set down here and rested here’s
his footmarks them same rubber heels He amt a mile
ahead right now^ Come on, boys*” They went on, the
leashes taut, the dogs baymg, the men moving now at a
trot The sheriff turned to the unshaven man

“Now’s your chance to run ahead and catch him and get
that thousand dollars/’ he said “Why dont you do it?”

The man did not answer, none of them had much breath
for talking, particularly when after about a mile the dogs,
still straining and baymg, turned from the road and fol-
lowed a path which went quartering up a hill and mto a
com field Here they stopped baymg, but if anything their
eagerness seemed to increase, the men were running now
Beyond the headtall corn was a Negro cabin “He’s in there,”
the sheriff said, drawing his pistol "Watch yourselves now,
boys Hell have a gun now”

It was done with finesse and skill the house surrounded
by concealed men with drawn pistols, and the sheriff, fol-
lowed by the deputy, getting himself for all his bulk swiftly
and smartly flat against the cabin wall, out of range of any
window* Still flat to the wall he ran aiound the comer and



288

lacked open the door and sprang, pistol first, mto the cabin
It contained a Negro child The child was stark naked and
it sat m the cold ashes on the hearth, eating something It
was apparently alone, though an instant later a woman ap-
peared in an inner door, her month open, m tlie act of drop
ping an non skillet She was wearing a pair of man's shoes,
which a member of the posse identified as having belonged
to the fugitive She told them about the white man on the
road about daylight and how he had swapped shoes with
her, taking m exchange a pair of her husband's brogans
which she was wearing at the time The sheriff listened
"That happened right by a cotton house, didn’t it?” he said
She told him Yes He returned to his men, to the leashed
and eager dogs He looked down at the dogs while the
men asked questions and then ceased, watching him They
watched him put the pistol back mto his pocket and then
turn and lack the dogs, once each, heavily "Get them dura
eggsuckers on back to town,” he said
But the sheriff was a good officer He knew as well as
his men that he would return to the cotton house, where
he believed that Christmas had been hidden all the while,
though he knew now that Christmas would not be there
when they returned They had some trouble getting the
dogs away from the cabm, so that it was m the hot bril-
liance of ten o’clock that they surrounded the cotton house
carefully and skilfully and quietly and surprised it with
pistols, quite by the rules and without any particular hope,
and found one astonished and terrified field rat Neverthe-
less the sheriff had the dogs — they had refused to approach
the cotton house at all, they refused to leave the road, lean-
ing and straining agamst the collars with simultaneous and
reverted heads pointed back down the road toward the
cabm from which they had been recently dragged away —
brought up It took two men by mam strength to fetch
them up, where as soon as the leashes were slacked, they



289

sprang as one and rushed around the cotton house and
through the very marks which the fugitive's legs had left
in the tall and still dewed weeds m the house's shadow, and
rushed leapmg and straining back toward the road, drag-
ging the two men for fifty yards before they succeeded in
passing the leashes about a sapling and snubbmg the dogs
up This time the sheriff did not even kick them

At last the noise and the alarms, the sound and fury of
the hunt, dies away, dies out of his hearing He was not
m the cotton house when the man and the dogs passed, as
the sheriff believed He paused there only long enough to
lace up the brogans the black shoes, the black shoes smell-
ing of Negro They looked like they had been chopped out
of iron ore with a dull axe Looking down at the harsh,
crude, clumsy shapelessness of them, he said "Hah" through
his teeth It seemed to him that he could see himself being
hunted by white men at last into the black abyss which had
been waiting, trying, for thirty years to drown him and
into which now and at last he had actually entered, bearing
now upon his ankles the definite and ineradicable gauge
of its upward moving

It is just dawn, daylight that gray and lonely suspension
filled with the peaceful and tentative wakmg of birds The
air, inbreathed, is like spring water He breathes deep and
slow, feeling with each breath himself diffuse in the neutral
grayness, becoming one with loneliness and qmet that has
never known fury or despair That was all I wanted/ he
thinks, m a qmet and slow amazement That was all, for
thirty years That didn't seem to be a whole lot to ask in
thirty years '

He has not slept very much smce Wednesday, and now
Wednesday has come and gone again, though he does not
know it When he thinks about time, it seems to him now
that for thirty years he has lived inside an orderly parade



290

of named and numbered days like fence pickets, and that
one night he went to sleep and when he waked up he was
outside of them For a time after he fled on that Friday
night he tried to keep up with the dajs, after the old habit
Once, after lymg all night m a haystack, he was awake in
time to watch the farm house wake He saw before dajdight
a lamp come yellowly alive m the kitchen, and then m the
gray yetdark he heard the slow, clapping sound of an axe,
and movement, manmovement, among the waking cattle
sounds m the nearby barn Then he could smell smoke, and
food, the hot fierce food, and he began to say over and over
to himself I have not eaten since I have not eaten since
trying to remember how many days it had been since Fri-
day m Jefferson, in the restaurant where he had eaten his
supper, until after a while, in the lying still with waiting
until the men should have eaten and gone to the field, the
name of the day of the week seemed more important than
the food Because when the men were gone at la&t and he
descended, emerged, mto the level, jonquilcolored sun and
went to the kitchen door, he didn’t ask for food at all He
had intended to He could feel the harsh words marshaling
in his mmd, just behind his mouth And then the gaunt,
leatherhard woman come to the door and looked at him
and he could see shock and recognition and fear m her
eyes and while he was thinking She knows me She has
got the word too he heard his mouth saying quietly "Can
you tell me what day this is? I just want to know what day
this is *

"What day it is?” Her face was gaunt as his, her body as
gaunt and as tireless and as driven She said "You get away
from here* It’s Tuesday! You get away from here! Ill call
my man!”

He said, "Thank you,” quietly as the door banged Then
he was running He did not remember starting to run He
thought for a while that he ran because of and toward some



291

destination that the running had suddenly remembered
and hence his mind did not need to bother to remember
why he was running, smce the running was not difficult It
was quite easy, m fact He felt quite light, weightless Even
in full stride his feet seemed to stray slowly and lightly and
at deliberate random across an earth without solidity, until
he fell Nothing tripped him He just fell full length, believ-
ing for a while that he was still on his feet and still running
But he was down, lying on his face m a shallow ditch at the
edge of a plowed field Then he said suddenly, "I reckon I
better get up ” When he sat up he found that the sun, half-
way up the sky, now shone upon him from the opposite
direction At first he believed that he was merely turned
around Then he realised that it was now evening That
It was morning when he fell running and that, though it
seemed to him that he had sat up at once, it was now eve-
ning T have been asleep/ he thought 1 have slept more
than six hours I must have gone to sleep running without
knowing it That is what I did ’

He felt no surprise Time, the spaces of light and dark,
had long smce lost orderliness It would be either one now,
seemingly at an mstant, between two movements of the
eyelids, without warmng He could never know when he
would pass from one to the other, when he would find
that he had been asleep without remembering having lam
down, or find himself walking without remembering hav-
ing waked Sometimes it would seem to him that a night
of sleep, m hay, m a ditch, beneath an abandoned roof,
would be followed immediately by another night without
interval of day, without light between to see to flee by,
that a day would be followed by another day filled with
fleeing and urgency, without any night between or any in-
terval for rest, as if the sun had not set but instead had
turned m the sky before reaching the honzon and retraced
its way When he went to sleep walking or even kneeling



292

m the act of drinking from a spring, he could never know
if his eyes would open next upon sunlight or upon stars
For a while he had been hungry all the time He gath-
ered and ate rotting and woimriddled fruit, now and then
he crept into fields and dragged down and gnawed ripened
ears of com as hard as potato grateis He thought of eating
all the time, imagining dishes, food He would think of that
meal set for him on the kitchen table three years ago
and he would live agam through the steady and deliberate
backswingmg of his arm as he hurled the dishes mto the
wall, with a kmd of writhing and excruciating agony of re-
gret and remorse and rage Then one day he was no longer
hungry It came sudden and peaceful He felt cool, quiet
Yet he knew that he had to eat He would make himself eat
the rotten fruit, the hard corn, chewing it slowly, tastmg
nothing He would eat enormous quantities of it, with re-
sultant crises of bleeding flux Yet immediately afterward
he would be obsessed anew with the need and the urge to
eat It was not with food that he was obsessed now, but
with the necessity to eat He would try to remember when
he had eaten last of cooked, of decent food He could feel,
remember, somewhere a house, a cabin House or cabin,

white or black he could not remember which Then, as he

»

sat quite still, with on his gaunt, sick, stubbled face an ex-
pression of rapt bemusement, he smelled Negro Motionless
{he was sitting against a tree beside a spring, has head
back, his hands upon his lap, his face worn and peaceful)
he smelled and saw Negro dishes, Negro food It was m a
room He did not remember how he got there But the room
was filled with flight and abrupt consternation, as though
people had fled it recently and suddenly and m fear He
was sitting at a table, waiting, thinking of nothing in an
emptiness, a silence filled with flight Then there was food
before him, appealing suddenly between long, limber black
hands fleeing too m the act of setting down the dishes It



293

seemed to him that he could hear without hearing them
wails of terror and distress quieter than sighs all about him,
with the sound of the chewing and the swallowing It was
a cabin that time/ he thought "And they were afraid Of
their brother afraid ’

That night a strange thing came into his mind He laj
ready for sleep, without sleeping, without seeming to need
the sleep, as he would place his stomach acquiescent fcr
food which it did not seem to desire or need It was strange
m the sense that he could discover neither derivation nor
motivation nor explanation for it He found that he was
trying to calculate the day of the week It was as though
now and at last he had an actual urgent need to strike
off the accomplished days toward some purpose, some defi-
nite day or act, without either falling short or overshooting
He entered the coma state which sleeping had now become
with the need m his mind When he waked in the dewgray
of dawn, it was so crystallised that the need did not seem
strange any more

It is just dawn, daylight He rises and descends to the
spring and takes from his pocket the razor, the brush,
the soap But it is still too dim to see his face clearly m the
water, so he sits beside the spring and waits until he can
see better Then he lathers his face with the hard, cold wa-
ter, patiently His hand trembles, despite the urgency he
feels a lassitude so that he must drive himself The razor is
dull, he tries to whet it upon the side of one brogan, but
the leather is ixonhard and wet with dew He shaves, after
a fashion His hand trembles, it is not a very good job, and
he cuts himself three or four times, stanching the blood
with the cold water until it stops He puts the shaving tools
away and begins to walk He follows a straight line, dis j
regarding the easier walking of the ndges After a short dis-
tance he comes out upon a road and sits down Reside it
It is a quiet road, appearing and vanishing quiet!) , the pale



294

dust marked only by narrow and infrequent wheels and
by the hooves of horses and mules and now and then by
the print of human feet He sits beside it, coatless, the
once white shirt and the once creased trousers muddy and
stained, his gaunt face blotched with patches of stubble
and with dried blood, shaking slowly with weariness and
cold as the sun rises and warms him After a time two Negro
children appear around the curve, approaching They do
not see him until he speaks, they halt, dead, looking at him
with whiterolling eyes “What day of the week is it?” he
repeats They say nothing at all, staring at him He moves
his head a little “Go on,” he says They go on He does not
watch them He sits, apparently musmg upon the place
where they had stood, as though to him they had in mov-
ing merely walked out of two shells He does not see that
they are running

Then, sitting there, the sun warming him slowly, he goes
to sleep without knowing it, because the next thing of
which he is conscious is a terrific clatter of jangling and
rattling wood and metal and trotting hooves He opens
his eyes m time to see the wagon whirl slewing around the
curve beyond and so out of sight, its occupants looking
back at him over their shoulders, the whiphand of the
driver rising and falling ‘They recognised me too/ he
thinks Them, and that white woman And the Negioes
where I ate that day Any of them could have captured me,
if that’s what they want Since that’s what they all want
for me to be captured But they all run first They all want
me to be captured, and then when I come up ready to say
Here I am Yes 1 would say Here I am I am tired 1 am tired
of running of having to carry my life like it was a basket of
eggs they all run away Like there is a rule to catch me by,
and to capture me that way would not be like the rule says ’

So he moves back into the bushes This time he is alert



295

and lie hears the wagon before it comes mto sight He does
not show himself until the wagon is abreast of him Then
he steps forth and says, 4 Hey” The wagon stops, jerked
up The Negro drivers head jerks also, into his face also
comes the astonishment, then the recognition and the ter-
ror "What day is this?” Christmas says
The Negro glares at him, slack] awed "W-what you say?**
"What day of the week is this? Thursday? Friday? What?
What day? I am not going to hurt you ”

Tt’s Friday,” the Negro says "O Lawd God, it’s Friday ’*
"Friday” Christmas says Agam he jerks his head “Get
on ” The whip falls, the mules surge forward This wagon
too whirls from sight at a dead run, the whip rising and
falling But Christmas has already turned and entered the
woods agam

Agam his direction is straight as a surveyor's line, disre-
garding hill and valley and bog Yet he is not hurrying He
is like a man who knows where he is and where he wants
to go and how much time to the exact minute he has to get
there in It is as though he desires to see his native earth
in all its phases for the first or the last time He had grown
to manhood in the country, where like the unswiinming
sailor his physical shape and his thought had been molded
by its compulsions without his learning anything about its
actual shape and feel For a week now he has lurked and
crept among its secret places, yet he remained a foreigner
to the very immutable laws which earth must obey For
some time as he walks steadily on, he thinks that this is
what it is — the looking and seeing — which gives him peace
and unhaste and quiet, until suddenly the true answer
comes to him He feels dry and light 1 dont have to bother
about having to eat any more/ he thinks That's what it is *
By noon he has walked eight miles He comes now to a
broad gravelled road, a highway This time the wagon stops



296

quietly at his raised hand On the face of the Negro youth
who drives it there is neither astonishment nor recognition
' Where does this road go?” Christmas says
"Mottstown Whar I gwme ”

"Mottstown You going to Jefferson too? '

The youth rubs his head "Dont know whai that is I
gwme to Mottstown ”

"Oh/ 5 Christmas says "I see You dont hve around here,
then ”

' Naw, sir I stays two counties back yonder Been on the
road three days I gwme to Mottstown to get a yellm calf
pappy bought You wanter go to Mottstown?”

"Yes/ 5 Christmas says He mounts to the scat beside the
youth The wagon moves on 'Mottstown/ he thinks Jeffer-
son is only twenty miles away 'Now I can let go for a
while/ he thinks 1 haven't let go for seven days, so I guess
III let go for a while 5 He thinks that perhaps, sitting, with
the wagon's motion to lull him, he will sleep But he does
not sleep He is not sleepy or hungiy or even tired He is
somewhere between and among them, suspended, swaying
to the motion of the wagon without thought, without feel-
ing He has lost account of time and distance, perhaps it is
an hour later, perhaps three The youth says
"Mottstown Dar tis ”

Looking, he can see the smoke low on the sky, beyond
an impel ceptible corner, he is entering it agam, the street
which ran for thirty years It had been a paved street,
where going should be fast It had made a circle and he is
still inside of it Though during the last seven days he has
had no paved street, yet he has travelled farther than in all
the thirty years before And yet he is still inside the circle
'And yet I have been farther m these seven days than m all
the thirty years/ he thinks 'But I have never got outside
that circle I have never broken out of the ring of what I
have already done and cannot ever undo/ he thinks quietly,



297

sitting on the seat, with planted on the dashboard before
him the shoes, the black shoes smelling of Negro that mark
on his ankles the gauge definite and ineradicable of the
black tide creeping up his legs, moving from his feet up
ward as death moves



15


ON THAT FRIDAY WHEN CHRISTMAS WAS CAPTURED IN MOTTS-

town, there lived in the town an old couple named Hines
They were quite old They lived m a small bungalow m
a neighborhood of Negroes, how, upon what, the town m
general did not know since they appeared to live m filthy
poverty and complete idleness, Hines, as far as the town
knew, not having done any work, steady work, in twenty-
five years

They came to Mottstown thirty years ago One day the
town found the woman established m the small house
where they had lived ever since, though for the next five
years Hines was at home only once a month, over the week-
end Soon it became known that he held some kind of a
position in Memphis Exactly what, was not known, since
even at that time he was a secret man who could have been
either thirtyfive or fifty, with something m his glance coldly
and violently fanatical and a little crazed, precluding ques-
tioning, curiosity The town looked npon them both as be-
ing a little touched — lonely, gray in color, a little smaller
than most other men and women, as if they belonged to a
different race, species — even though for the next five or six
years after the man appeared to have come to Mottstown
m



299

to settle down for good m the small house where his wife
lived, people hired him to do various odd jobs which they
considered withm his strength But m time he stopped this,
too The town wondered for a while, how they would live
now, then it forgot to speculate about this just as later
when the town learned that Hines went on foot about the
county, holding revival services in Negro churches, and
that now and then Negro women carrying what were obvi-
ously dishes of food would be seen entering from the rear
the house where the couple lived, and emerging empty-
handed, it wondered about this for a time and then forgot
it In time the town either forgot or condoned, because
Hines was an old man and harmless, that which m a young
man it would have crucified It just said, They are crazy,
crazy on the subject of Negroes Maybe they are Yankees/*
and let it go at that Or perhaps what it condoned was not
the man s selfdedication to the saving of Negro souls, but
the public ignoring of the fact of that chanty which they
received from Negro hands, since it is a happy faculty of
the mind to slough that which conscience refuses to assimi-
late

So for twentyfive years the old couple had had no visible
means of support, the town blinding its collective eye tc
the Negro women and the covered dishes and pans, partial**
larly as some of the dishes and pans had in all likelihood
been borne intact from white kitchens where the women
cooked Perhaps this was a part of the minds sloughing
Anyway the town did not look, and for twentyfive years
now the couple had lived m the slack backwater of their
lonely isolation, as though they had been two muskoxen
strayed from the north pole, or two homeless and belated
beasts from beyond the glacial period

fhe woman was hardly ever seen at all, though the man
— he was known as Uncle Doc — was a fixture about the
square a dirty little old man with a face which had once



300

been either courageous or violent — either a visionary or a
supreme egoist — collarless, m dirty blue jean clothes and
With a heavy piece of handpeeled hickory worn about the
grip dark as walnut and smooth as glass At first, while he
held the Memphis position, on his monthly visits he had
talked a little about himself, with a selfconfidence not alone
of the independent man, but with a further quality, as
though at one time in his life he had been better than in-
dependent, and that not long ago There was nothing
beaten about him It was rather that confidence of a man
who has had the controlling of lesser men and who had
voluntarily and for a reason which he believed that no other
man could question or comprehend, changed his life But
what he told about himself and his present occupation did
not make sense, for all its apparent coherence So they be-
lieved that he was a little crazy, even then It was not that
he seemed to be trying to conceal one thing by telling an-
other It was that his words, his telling, just did not syn-
chronise with what his hearers believed would (and must)
be the scope of a single individual Sometimes they de-
cided that he had once been a minister Then he would
talk about Memphis, the city, m a vague and splendid
way, as though all his life he had been incumbent there
of some important though still nameless municipal office
“Sure/* the men m Mottstown said behind his back, “he
Was railroad superintendent there Standing in the middle
of the street ciossmg with a red flag every time a train
passed/ 9 or “He's a big newspaperman Gathers up the
papers from under the park benches” They did not say
this to his face, not the boldest among them, not the ones
with the most precariously nourished reputations for wit
Then he lost the Memphis job, or quit it One weekend
he came home, and when Monday came he did not go
away After that he was downtown all day long, about the
square, untalkative, dirty, with that furious and preclusive



301

expression about the eyes which the people took for in-
sanity that quality of outworn violence like a scent, an
odor, that fanaticism like a fading and almost extinct
ember, of some kind of twofisted evangelism which had
been one quarter violent conviction and three quarters
physical hardihood So they were not so surprised when
they learned that he was going about the county, usually on
foot, preaching m Negro churches, not even when a year
later they learned what his subject was That this white
man who very nearly depended on the bounty and chanty
of Negroes for sustenance was going smglehanded into re-
mote Negro churches and interrupting the service to enter
the pulpit and in his harsh, dead voice and at times with
violent obscenity, preach to them humility before all skins
lighter than theirs, preaching the supenonty of the white
race, himself his own exhibit A m fanatic and unconscious
paradox The Negroes believed that he was crazy, touched
by God, or having once touched Him They probably did
not listen to, could not understand much of, what he said
Perhaps they took him to be God Himself, since God to
them was a white man too and His doings also a little in-
explicable

He was downtown that afternoon when Christmas" name
first flew up and down the street, and the boys and men—
the merchants, the clerks, the idle and the curious, with
countrymen m overalls predominating — began to run
Hines ran too But he could not run fast and he was not
tall enough to see over the clotted shoulders when he did ar-
rive Nevertheless he tried, as brutal and intent as any there,
to force bis way mto the loud surging group as though in a
resurgence of die old violence which had marked his face,
clawing at the backs and at last striking at them with the
stick until men turned and recognised him and held him,
struggling, striking at them with the heavy stick, “Christ
mas?" he shouted “Did they say Christmas?"



302

“Christmas!” one of the men who held him cried back,
his face too strained, glaring “Christmas! That white nig-
ger that did that killing up at Jefferson last week!”

Hines glared at the man, his toothless mouth lightly
foamed with spittle Then he struggled again, violent, curs-
ing a frail little old man with the light, frail bones of a
child, trying to fight free with the stick, trying to club his
way mto the center where the captive stood bleeding about
the face “Now, Uncle Doc!” they said, holding him, “now.
Uncle Doc They got him He cant get away Here, now ”

But he struggled and fought, cursing, his voice cracked,
thin , his mouth slavering, they who held him struggling too
like men trying to hold a small threshing hose m which the
pressure is too great for its size Of the entire group the
captive was the only calm one They held Hines, cursing,
his old frail bones and his strmglike muscles for the time
inherent with the fluid and supple fury of a weasel He
broke free of them and sprang forward, burrowing, and
broke through and came face to face with the captive Here
he paused for an mstant, glaring at the captive's face It was
a full pause, but before they could grasp him again he had
raised the stick and struck the captive once and he was
trying to strike again when they caught him at last and
held him impotent and raging, with that light, thm foam
about his lips They had not stopped his mouth “Kill the
bastard!” he cned “Kill him Kill him”

Thirty minutes later two men brought him home m a
car One of them drove while the other held Hmes up in
the back seat His face was pale now beneath the stubble
and the dirt, and his eyes were closed They lifted him
bodily from the car and carried him tlirough the gate and
up the walk of rotting bricks and shards of conciete, to the
steps, His eyes were open now, but they were quite empty,
rolled back mto his skull until the dirty, bluish whites alone
showed But he was still quite limp and helpless Just be-



SOS

fore they reached the porch the front door opened and his
wife came out and closed the door behind her and stood
there, watching them They knew that it was his wife be-
cause she came out of the house where he was known to
live One of the men, though a resident of the town, had
never seen her before “What is it?” she said

“He s all right,” the first man said “We ]ust been having
a right smart of excitement downtown a while ago, and
with tins hot weather and all, it was a little too much for
him ” She stood before the door as if she were barring them
from the house — a dumpy, fat little woman with a round
face like dirty and unovened dough, and a tight screw of
scant hair “They just caught that nigger Christmas that
killed that lady up at Jefferson last week,” the man said
“Uncle Doc just got a little upset over it”

Mrs Hines was already turning back, as though to open
the door As the first man said later to his companion, she
halted m the act of turning, as if someone had hit her
lightly with a thrown pebble “Caught who?” she said
“Christmas,” the man said “That nigger murderer.
Christmas n

She stood at the edge of the porch, looking down at them
with her gray, still face “As if she already knew what I
would tell her,” the man said to his companion as they re-
turned to the car “Like she wanted all at the same time
for me to tell her it was him and it wasn’t him ”

"What does he look like?” she said

“I never noticed much,” the man said “They had to
bloody him up some, catching him Young fellow He dont
look no more like a nigger than I do, either ” The woman
looked at them, down at them Between the two men times
stood on his own legs now, muttering a little now as if he
were waking from sleep “What do you want us to do with
Uncle Doc?” the man said

She did not answer that at all It was as though she had



304

not even recognised her husband, the man told his com-
panion later “What are they going to do with him?’ she
said

“Him?” the man said “Oh The nigger That’s for Jeff ei son
to say He belongs to them up theie”

She looked down at them , giay, still, remote “ Are they
going to wait on Jefferson?”

“They**” the man said “Oh/ he said “Well, if Jefferson
amt too long about it ” He slnfted his grip on the old man’s
aim “Where do you want us to put him?” The woman
moved then She descended the steps and approached
“Well tote him into the house foi you, ’ the man said
“I can tote him,” she said She and Hmes were about the
game height, though she was the heavier She grasped him
beneath the arms “Eupheus,” she said, not loud, “Eupheus ”
She said to the two men, quietly “Let go I got him ” They
released him He walked a little now They watched her
help him up the steps and mto the door She did not look
back

“She never even thanked us,” the second man said
“Maybe we ought to take him back and put him m jail with
the nigger, since he seemed to know him so well ”
“Eupheus,” the first man said “Eupheus I been wonder-
ing for fifteen years what his name might be Eupheus ”
“Come on Let’s get on back We might miss some of it ”
The first man looked at the house, at the closed door
through which the two people had vanished “She knowed
him too”

“Knowed who?”

“That nigger Christmas ”

“Come on” They returned to the car “What do you
(flunk about that dura fellow, coming right into town here,
within twenty miles of where he done it, walking up and
down the mam street until somebody recognised him I
Wish it had been me that recognised him I could have used



305

that thousand dollars But I never do have any luck” The
car moved on The first man was still looking back at the
blank door through which the two people had disappeared

In the hall of that little house dark and small and rankly-
odored as a cave, the old couple stood The old man's spent
condition was still little better than coma, and when his
wife led him to a chair and helped him into it, it seemed a
matter of expediency and concern But there was no need
to return and lock the front door, which she did She came
and stood over him for a while At first it seemed as if she
were just watching him, with concern and solicitude Then
a third person would have seen that she was trembling
violently and that she had lowered him into the chair either
before she dropped him to the floor or in order to hold him
prisoner until she could speak She leaned above him,
dumpy, obese, gray m color, with a face like that of a
drowned corpse When she spoke her voice shook and she
strove with it, shaking, her hands clenched upon the arms
of the chair in which he half lay, her voice shaking, re-
strained “Eupheus You listen to me You got to listen to
me I amt worried you before In thirty years I amt worried
you But now I am going to I am gomg to know and you
got to tell me What did you do with Milly's baby?”

Through the long afternoon they clotted about the square
and before the jail — the clerks, the idle, the countrymen m
overalls, the talk It went here and there about the town,
dying and homing agam like a wind or a fire until m the
lengthening shadows the country people began to depart
in wagons and dusty cars and the townspeople began to
move supperward Then the talk flared agam, momentarily
revived, to wives and families about supper tables m elec-
trically lighted rooms and in remote hill cabins with kero-
sene lamps And on the next day, the slow, pleasant country
Sunday while they squatted m their clean shirts and deco-



306

rated suspenders, with peaceful pipes about country
churches or about the shady dooryards of houses where the
visiting teams and cars were tethered and parked along
the fence and the womenfolks were m the kitchen, getting
dinner, they told it again “He dont look any more like a
tugger than I do But it must have been the nigger blood in
him It looked hie he had set out to get himself caught
like a man might set out to get married He had got clean
away for a whole week If he had not set fire to the hou^e,
they might not have found out about the murder for a
month And they would not have suspected him then if it
hadn’t been for a fellow named Brown, that the nigger used
to sell whiskey while he was pretending to be a white man
and tried to lay the whiskey and the killing both on Brown
and Brown told the truth

“Then yesterday morning he come into Mottstown In
broad daylight, on a Saturday with the town full of folks
He went into a white barbershop like a white man, and
because he looked like a white man they never suspected
him Even when the bootblack saw how he had on a pair
of second hand brogans that were too big for him, they
never suspected They shaved him and cut his hair and he
paid them and walked out and went right into a store and
bought a new shut and a tie and a straw hat, with some of
the very money he stole from the woman he murdered
And then he walked the streets m broad daylight, like he
owned the town, walking back and forth with people pass-
ing him a dozen times and not knowing it, until Halliday
saw him and ran up and grabbed him and said, 'Amt
your name Christmas?’ and the nigger said that it was He
never denied it He never did anything He never acted
like either a nigger or a white man That was it That was
what made the folks so mad For him to be a murderer
and all dressed up and walking the town hke he dared
them to touch him, when he ought to have been skulking



807

and hiding in the woods* muddy and dirty and r unnin g
It was Lie he never even knew he was a murderer* let
alone a nigger too

And so Halhday (he was excited* thinking about that
thousand dollars, and he had already hit the rugger a couple
of times m the face* and the nigger acting like a nigger for
the first time and takmg it, not saying anything just
bleeding sullen and quiet) — Halhday was hollering and
holding him when the old man they call Uncle Doc Hines
come up and begun to hit the nigger with his walking stick
until at last two men had to hold Uncle Doc quiet and
took him home m a car Nobody knew if he really did
know the nigger or not He just come hobbling up, screech-
ing, Is his name Christmas? Did you say Christmas?’ and
shoved up and took one look at the nigger and then begun
to beat him with the walking stick He acted like he was
hypnotised or something They had to hold him, and his
eyes rolling blue into his head and slobbering at the mouth
and cutting with that stick at everything that come into
reach, until all of a sudden he land of flopped Then two
fellows carried him home in a car and his wife come out
and took him mto the house, and the two fellows come on
back to town They didn’t know what was wrong with
him, to get so excited a^ter the nigger was caught, but any-
way they thought that he would be all right now But
here it was not a half an hour before he was back down-
town again He was pure crazy by now, standing on the
corner and yelling at whoever would pass, calling them
cowards because they wouldn’t take the nigger out of jail
and hang him nght then and there, Jefferson or no Jeffer-
son He looked crazy m the face, like somebody that had
done shpped away from a crazy house and that knew he
wouldn’t have much time before they come and got him
agam Folks say that he used to be a preacher, too

"He said that he had a nght to kill the nigger He never



308

said why, and he was too worked up and crazy to make
sense even when somebody would stop him long enough
to ask a question There was a right good crowd around
him by then, and him yelling about how it was his right
to say first whether the nigger should live or should die
And folks were beginning to think that maybe the place
for him was m the jail with the nigger, when here his wife
come up

"There are folks that have lived in Mottstown for
thirty years and haven't ever seen her They didn't know
who she was then until she spoke to him, because the ones
that had seen her, she was always around that little house
in Niggertown where they live, m a mother hubbard and
one of his woreout hats But she was dressed up now She
had on a purple silk dress and a hat with a plume on it and
she was carrying a umbrella and she come up to the crowd
where he was hollering and yelling and she said, "Eupheus ’
He stopped yelling then and he looked at her, with that
stack still raised in his hand and it kind of shaking, and
his jaw dropped slack, slobbering She took him by the arm
A lot of folks had been scared to come nigh him because
of that stick, he looked like he might hit anybody at any
minute and not even knowed it or intended it But she
walked nght up under the stick and took him by the arm
and led him across to where there was a chair m front of a
store and she set him down m the chair and she said, "You
stay here till I come back Dont you move, now And you
quit that yelling *

"And he did He sho did He set right there where she
put him, and she never looked back, neither They all
noticed that Maybe it was because folks never saw her ex-
cept around home, staying at home And him being a kind
of fierce little old man that a man wouldn't cross without
he thought about it first Anyhow they were surprised They
hadn't even thought of him faking orders from anybody



309

It was like she had got something on him and he had to
mind her Because he sat down when she told him to, in
that chair, not hollering and talking big now, but with his
head bent down and his hands shaking on that big walking
stick and a little slobber still running out of Ins mouth, onto
Ins shirt

"She went straight to the jail There was a big crowd m
front of it, because Jefferson had sent word that they were
on the way down to get the nigger She walked right
through them and into the jail and she said to Metcalf, 1
want to see that man they caught ’

“ "What do you want to see him for?’ Metcalf said
"1 amt going to bother him/ she said 1 just want to
look at him 5

"Metcalf told her there was a right smart of other folks
that wanted to do that, and that he knew she didn’t aim to
help him escape, but that he was just the jailer and he
couldn’t let anybody m without he had permission from
the sheriff And her standing there, m that purple dress
and the plume not even nodding and bending, she was that
still "Where is the sheriff^’ she said
" 'He might be m his office/ Metcalf said "You find ham
and get permission from him Then you can see the nigger ’
Metcalf thought that that would finish it So he watched
her turn and go out and walk through the crowd in front
of the jail and go back up the street toward the square
The plume was nodding now He could see it nodding
along above the fence And then he saw her go across the
square and m to the courthouse The folks didn’t know
what she was doing, because Metcalf hadn’t had time to
tell them what happened at the jail They just watched her
go on into the courthouse, and then Russell said how he
was m the office and he happened to look up and there that
hat was with the plume on it just beyond the window across
fixe counter He didn’t know how long she had been stand-



310

mg there, waiting for him to look up He said she was ]ust
tall enough to see over the counter, so that she didnt
look like she had any body at all It just looked like some-
body had sneaked up and set a toy balloon with a face
painted on it and a comic hat set on top of it, like the
Katzenjammer kids in the funny paper *1 want to see the
sheriff/ she says

* ‘He amt here/ Russell says Tm his deputy What can
I do for you?*

"He said she didn't answer for a while, standing there
Then she said, ‘Where can I find him?’

"‘He might be at home/ Russell says ‘He's been right
busy, this week Up at night some, helping those Jefferson
officers He might be home taking a nap But maybe I
can — • But he said that she was already gone He said he
looked out the window and watched her go on across the
square and turn the comer toward where the sheriff lived
He said he was still trying to place her, to think who she
was

"She never found the sheriff But it was too late then,
anyway Because the sheriff was already at the jail, only
Metcalf hadn't told her, and besides she hadn't got good
away from the jail before the Jefferson officers came up m
two cars and went into the jail They came up quick and
went m quick but the word had already got around that
they were there, and there must have been two hundred
men and boys and women too in front of the jail when
the two sheriffs come out onto the porch and our sheriff
made a speech, asking the folks to respect the law and that
him and the Jefferson sheriff both promised that the nigger
would get a quick and fair trial, and then somebody m the
crowd says, ‘Fair, hell Did he give that white woman a fair
trial?' And they hollered then* crowding up, like they were
hollering for one another to the dead woman and not to
the sheriffs But the sheriff kept on talking quiet to them.



Sll

about how it was his sworn word given to them on the day
they elected him that he was trying to keep 1 have no more
sympathy with nigger murderers than any other white man
here/ he says ‘But it is my sworn oath, and by God I aim
to keep it I dont want no trouble, but I amt going to dodge
it You better smoke that for a while ’ And Halkday was
there too, with the sheriffs He was the foremost one about
reason and not making trouble Taah/ somebody hollers,
'we reckon you dont want him lynched But he amt worth
any thousand dollars to us He amt worth a thousand dead
matches to us ’ And then the sheriff says quick “What if
Halkday dont want him killed? Dont we all want the same
thing? Here it’s a local citizen that will get the reward
the money will be spent right here m Mottstown Just sup-
pose it was a Jefferson man was going to get it Amt that
right, men? Aint that sensible 5 ’’ His voice sounded little,
like a doll’s voice, like even a big man s voice will sound
when he is talking not against folks’ listening but against
their already half-made-up minds

“Anyway, that seemed to convince them, even if folks did
know that Mottstown or nowhere else was going to see
enough of that thousand dollars to fat a calf, if Halliday
was the one that had the spending of it But that did it
Folks are funny They cant stick to one way of thinking
or doing anything unless they get a new reason for doing
it ever so often And then when they do get a new reason,
they are hable to change anyhow So they didn’t give back
exactly, it was like when before that the crowd had land
of milled from the mside out, now it begun to mill from
the outside m And the sheriffs knew it, the same as they
knew that it might not last very long, because they went
back mto the jail quick and then came out again, almost
before they had time to turn around, with the nigger be-
tween them and five or six deputies following They must
have had him ready just inside the jail door all the time.



312

because they come out almost at once, with the nigger be-
tween them with his face suited up and his wrists hand-
cuffed to the Jefferson sheriff, and the crowd kind of says,
‘Ahhhhhhhhhhhhh’

“They made a kind of lane down to the street, where the
first Jefferson car was waiting with the engine runnmg and
a man behind the wheel, and the sheriffs were coming
along without wasting any time, when she come up again,
the woman, Mrs Hines She was shoving up through the
crowd She was so iowbuilt that all the folks could see was
that plume kind of bumping along slow, like something
that could not have moved very fast even if there wasn't
anything m the way, and that couldn't anything stop, like a
tractor She shoved right on thiough and out mto the lane
the folks had made, right out m front of the two sheriffs
with the nigger between them, so that they had to stop to
keep from runnmg over her Her face looked like a big
hunk of putty and her hat had got knocked sideways so
the plume hung down m front of her face and she had to
push it back to see But she didn't do anything She just
stopped them dead foi a minute while she stood there and
looked at the nigger She never said a word, like that was
all she had wanted and had been worrying folks for, like
that was the reason she had dressed up and come to town
just to look that nigger m the face once Because she turned
and begun to burrow back mto the crowd agam, and when
the cars drove off with the nigger and the Jefferson law and
the folks looked around, she was gone And they went back
to the square then, and Uncle Doc was gone too from the
chair where she had set him and told him to wait But all
of the folks didnt go straight back to the square A lot of
them stayed there, looking at the jail like it might have
been just the nigger s shadow that had come out

“They thought that she had taken Uncle Doc home It
was m front of Dollar's store and Dollar told about how



SIS

he saw her come back up the street ahead of the crowd
He said that Uncle Doc had not moved, that he was still
sitting m the chair where she had left him like he was
hypnotised, until she come up and touched his shoulder and
he got up and they went on together with Dollar watching
him And Dollar said that from the look on Uncle Docs
face, home was where he ought to be

"Only she never took him home After a while folks saw
that she wasn't having to take him anywhere It was like
they both wanted to do the same thing The same thing
but for different reasons, and each one knew that the other s
reason was different and that whichever of them got his
way, it would be serious for the other one Like they both
knew it without saying it and that each was watching the
other, and that they both knew that she would have the
most sense about getting them started

"They went straight to the garage where Salmon keeps
his rent car She did all the talking She said they wanted
to go to Jefferson Maybe they never dreamed that Salmon
would charge them more than a quarter apiece, because
when he said three dollars she asked him again, like maybe
she could not believe her ears 'Three dollars/ Salmon says
T couldn't do it for no less ' And them standing there and
Uncle Doc not takmg any part, like he was waiting, like it
wasn't any concern of his, like he knew that he wouldn't
need to bother that she would get them there
" 1 cant pay that,’ she says

"'You wont get it done no cheaper,' Salmon says 'Un-
less by the railroad They'll take you for fiftytwo cents
apiece ' But she was already gomg away, with Uncle Doc
following her like a dog would
"That was about four o'clock Until six o'clock the folks
saw them sitting on a bench m the courthouse yard They
were not talking it was like each one never even knew
the other one was there They just sat there side by side.



314

with her all dressed up m her Sunday clothes Maybe she
was enjoying herself, all dressed up and downtown all
Saturday evening Maybe it was to her what being m
Memphis all day would be to other folks
"They set there until the clock struck six Then they
got up Folks that saw it said she never said a word to him,
that they just got up at the same time like two birds do
from a limb and a man cant tell which one of them give
the signal When they walked. Uncle Doc walked a little
behind her They crossed the square this way and turned
into the street toward the depot And the folks knew that
there wasn’t any tram due for three hours and they won-
dered if they actually were going somewhere on the tram,
before they found out that they were going to do something
that surprised the folks moie than that, even They went
to that little cafe down by the depot and ate supper, that
hadn’t even been seen together on the street before, let
alone eating m a cafe, since they come to Jefferson But
that’s where she took him, maybe they were afraid they
would miss the tram if they ate downtown Because they
were there before half past six o’clock, sitting on two of
them little stools at the counter, eating what she had
ordered without asking Uncle Doc about it at all She asked
the cafd man about the tram to Jefferson and he told her it
went at two a m ‘Lots of excitement m Jefferson tonight/
he says ‘You can get a car downtown and be in Jefferson
in fortyfive minutes You dont need to wait until two
o clock on that tram’ He thought they were strangers
maybe, be told her which way town was
"But she didn’t say anything and they finished eating
and she paid him, a nickel and a dime at a time out of a tied
up rag that she took out of the umbrella, with Uncle Doc
setting there and waiting with that dazed look on his face
like he was walking m his sleep Then they left, and the
caf6 man thought they were going to take his advice and



315

go to town and get that car when he looked out and saw
them going on across the switch tracks, toward the depot
Once he started to call, but he didn’t T reckon I misun -
derstood her/ he says he thought ‘Maybe it’s the nine
o’clock southbound they want ’

“They were setting on the bench m the waitingroom
when the folks, the drummers and loafers and such, begun
to come in and buy tickets for the southbound The agent
said how he noticed there was some folks m the waiting-
room when he come in after supper at half past seven, but
that he never noticed particular until she come to the
ticket window and asked what time the tram left for
Jefferson He said he was busy at the time and that he just
glanced up and says, ‘Tomorrow,’ without stoppmg what
he was doing Then he said that after a while something
made him look up, and there was that round face watching
him and that plume still m the window, and she says,

“ ‘I want two tickets on it ’

“ “That tram is not due until two o’clock in the morning/
the agent says He didn’t recogmse her either ‘If you want
to get to Jefferson any time soon, you’d better go to town
and hire a car Do you know which way town is?’ But he
said she just stood there, counting nickels and dimes out
of that knotted rag, and he came and gave her the two
tickets and then he looked past her through the window
and saw Uncle Doc and he knew who she was And he
said how they sat there and the folks for the southbound
come m and the tram come and left and they still set there
He said how Uncle Doc still looked like he was asleep, or
doped or something And then the tram went, but some erf
the folks didn’t go back to town They stayed there, look-
ing m the window, and now and then they would come
in and look at Uncle Doc and his wife setting on the bench,
until the agent turned off the lights in the waitingroom*

“Some of the folks stayed, even after that They could



31 6


look in the window and see them setting there in the dark
Maybe they could see the plume, and the white of Uncle
Docs head And then Uncle Doc begun to wake up It
wasn't like he was surprised to find where he was, nor that
he was where he didn't want to be He just roused up,
like he had been coasting for a long time now, and now was
the time to put on the power again They could hear her
saying ‘Shhhhhhh Shhhhhhhhh/ to him, and then his voice
would break out They were still setting there when the
agent turned on the lights and told them that the two
o'clock tram was coming, with her saymg ‘Shhhhhhh
Shhhhhhhhhhh' like to a baby, and Uncle Doc hollering,
‘Bitchery and abomination! Abomination and bitcheryP *



16


WHEN HIS KNOCK GETS NO RESPONSE, BYRON LEAVES THE

porch and goes around the house and enters the small, en-
closed back yard He sees the chair at once beneath the
mulberry tree It is a canvas deck chair, mended and faded
and sagged so long to the shape of Hightower s body that
even when empty it seems to hold still in ghostly embrace
the owner’s obese shapelessness, approaching, Byron thinks
how the mute chair evocative of disuse and supmeness and
shabby remoteness from the world, is somehow the symbol
and the being too of the man himself "That I am going to
disturb again/ he thinks, with that famt lift of lip, think-
ing Again? The disturbing I have done him , even he will
see that that disturbing is nothing now And on Sunday
again But then I rechon Sunday would want to take re-
venge on him too , being as Sunday was invented by folks
He comes up behind the chair and looks down into it
Hightower is asleep Upon the swell of his paunch, where
the white shirt (it is a clean and fresh one now) balloons
out of the worn black trousers, an open book lies face
down Upon the book Hightower’s hands are folded, peace-
ful, benignant, almost pontifical The shirt is made after an

317



318

old fashion, with a pleated though carelessly ironed bosom,
and he wears no collar His mouth is open, the loose and
flabby flesh sagging away from the round orifice m which
the stained lower teeth show, and from the still fine nose
which alone age, the defeat of sheer years, has not changed
Looking down at the unconscious face, it seems to Byron
as though the whole man were fleeing away from the nose
which holds invincibly to something yet of pride and cour-
age above the sluttishness of vanquishment like a forgotten
flag above a ruined fortress Again light, the reflection of
sky beyond the mulberry leaves, ghnts and glares upon the
spectacle lenses, so that Byron cannot tell just when High-
tower s eyes open He sees only the mouth shut, and a
movement of the folded hands as Hightower sits up ‘Yes,”
he says, “yes* 3 Who is — Oh, Byron ”

Byron looks down at him, his face quite grave But it is
not compassionate now It is not anything it is just quite
sober and quite determined He says, without any inflection
at all "They caught him yesterday I dont reckon you have
heard that any more than you heard about the killing ”
“Caught him?”

“Christmas In Mottstown He came to town, and near as
I can learn, he stood around on the street until somebody
recognised him ”

“Caught him ” Hightower is sitting up m the chair now
“And you have come to tell me that he is — that they
have ”

“No Amt nobody done anything to him yet He amt
dead yet He s in the jail He's all right ”

“All right You say that he is all nght Byron says that he
is all right — Byron Bunch has helped the woman’s para-
mour sell his fnend for a thousand dollars, and Byron says
that it is all nght, Has kept the woman hidden from the
father of her child, while that — Shall I say, other paramour,



319

Byron? Shall I say that? Shall I refrain from the truth be-
cause Byron Bunch hides it?'

“If public talking makes truth, then I reckon that is truth
Especially when they find out that I have got both of them
locked up m jail ”

“Both of them?”

“Brown too Though I reckon most folks have about de-
cided that Brown wasn’t any more capable of doing that
lulling or helping m it than he was in catching the man that
did do it or helping m that But they can all say that Byron
Bunch has now got him locked up safe in jail ”

“Ah, yes ” Hightower s voice shakes a little, high and thin
“Byron Bunch, the guardian of public weal and morality
The gainer, the inheritor of rewards, since it will now de-
scend upon the morganatic wife of — Shall I say that too?
Shall I read Byron there too?” Then he begins to cry, sitting
huge and lax m the sagging chair “I dont mean that You
know I dont But it is not right to bother me, to worry me,
when I have — when I have taught myself to stay — have
been taught by them to stay — That this should come to
me, taking me after I am old, and reconciled to what they
deemed — ” Once before Byron saw him sit while sweat ran
down his face like tears, now he sees the tears themselves
run down the flabby cheeks like sweat

“I know Its a poor thing A poor dung to worry you
I didn’t know I didn’t know, when I first got mto it Or I
would have But you are a man of God You cant
dodge that,”

“I am not a man of God And not through my own de-
sire Remember that Not of my own choice that I am no
longer a man of God It was by the will, the more than be-
hest, of them like you and like her and like him in the jail
yonder and like them who put him there to do their will
upon, as they did upon me, with insult and violence upon



320

those who like them were created by the same God and
were driven by them to do that which they now turn and
rend them for having done it It was not my choice Re-
member that”

“1 know that Because a man amt given that many
choices You made your choice before that” Hightower
looks at him “You were given your choice before I was
born, and you took it before I or her or him either was
bom That was your choice And I reckon them that are
good must suffer for it the same as them that are bad The
same as her, and him, and me And the same as them others,
that other woman ”

“That other woman? Another woman? Must my life after
fifty years be violated and my peace destroyed by two lost
women, Byron?”

“This other one amt lost now She has been lost for thirty
years But she is found now Shes his grandmother ”

“Whose grandmother?”

“Christmas V" Byron says

Waiting, watching the street and the gate from the dark
study window, Hightower hears the distant music when it
first begins He does not know that he expects it, that on
each Wednesday and Sunday night, sitting in the dark win-
dow, he waits for it to begm He knows almost to the sec-
ond when he should begm to hear it, without recourse to
watch or clock He uses neither, has needed neither for
twentyfive years now He lives dissociated from mechanical
time Yet for that reason he has never lost it It is as though
out of his subeonseious he produces without volition the
few crystallizations of stated instances by which his dead
life m the actual world had been governed and ordered
once Without recourse to clock he could know immediately
upon the thought just where, m his old life, he would
be and what doing between the two fixed moments which



321

marked the beginning and the end of Sunday morning
service and Sunday evening service and prayer service on
Wednesday night, just when he would have been entering
the church, just when he would have been bringing to a
calculated close prayer or sermon So before twilight has
completely faded he is saying to himself Now they are
gathering, approaching along streets slowly and turning m,
greeting one another the groups , the couples , the single
ones There is a little informal talking m the church itself,
lowtoned , the ladies constant and a little sibilant with fans ,
nodding to arriving friends as they pass m the aisle Miss
Carruthers (she was his organist and she has been dead
almost twenty years) is among them , soon she will rise
and enter the organloft Sunday evening prayer meeting It
has seemed to him always that at that hour man approaches
nearest of all to God, nearer than at any other hour of all
the seven days Then alone, of all church gatherings, is
there something of that peace which is the promise and the
end of the Church The mind and the heart purged then*
if it is ever to be, the week and its whatever disasters fin* 1
ished and summed and expiated by the stem and formal
fury of the morning service, the next week and its whatever
disasters not yet bom, the heart quiet now for a little while
beneath the cool soft blowing of faith and hope
Sitting m the dark window he seems to see them Now
they are gathering , , entering the door They are marly all
there now And then he begins to say, "Now Now," lean-
ing a little forward, and then, as though it had waited fot
his signal, the music begins The organ strains come neb
and resonant through the summer night, blended, sono-
rous, with that quality of abjectness and sublimation, as if
the freed voices themselves were assuming the shapes and
attitudes of crucifixions, ecstatic, solemn, and profound in
gathering volume Yet even then the music has still a qual-
ity stem and implacable, deliberate and without passion so



mucli as immolation, pleading, asking, for not love, not Me,
forbidding it to others, demandmg in sonorous tones death
as though death were the boon, like all Protestant music
It was as though they who accepted it and raised voices to
praise it within praise, having been made what they were
by that which the music praised and symbolised, they took
revenge upon that which made them so by means of the
praise itself Listenmg, he seems to hear within it the apoth-
eosis of his own history, his own land, his own environed
blood that people from which he sprang and among whom
he lives who can never take either pleasure or catastrophe
or escape from either, without brawling over it Pleasure,
ecstasy, they cannot seem to bear their escape from it is in
violence, m drmkmg and fighting and praying, catastrophe
too, the violence identical and apparently inescapable And
so why should not their religion drive them to crucifixion of
themselves and one another ? he thinks It seems to him
that he can hear within the music the declaration and dedi-
cation of that which they know that on the morrow they
will have to do It seems to him that the past week has
rushed like a torrent and that the week to come, which will
begin tomorrow, is the abyss, and that now on the brink of
cataract the stream has raised a single blended and sono-
rous and austere cry, not for justification but as a dying
salute before its own plunge, and not to any god but to the
doomed man m the barred cell within hearing of them and
of the two other churches, and m whose crucifixion they
too will raise a cross "And they will do it gladly/ he says,
m the dark window He feels his mouth and jaw muscles
tauten with something premonitory, something more terri-
ble than laughing even ‘Since to pity him would be to ad-
mit selfdoubt and to hope for and need pity themselves
They will do it gladly, gladly That’s why it is so terrible,
terrible, terrible ’ Then, leaning forward, he sees three peo-
ple approach and turn into the gate, m silhouette now



32S

against the street lamp, among the shadows He has abeady
recognised Byron and he looks at the two who follow him
A woman and a man he knows them to be, yet save for the
skirt which one of them wears they are almost interchange-
able of a height, and of a width which is twice that of ordi-
nary man or woman, like two bears He begins to laugh
before he can prepare to stop it If Byron just had a hand-
kerchief about his head, and earrings/ he thinks, laughing
and laughing, making no sound, trying to prepare to stop
it m order to go to the door when Byron will knock

Byron leads them mto the study — a dumpy woman in a
purple dress and a plume and carrying an umbrella, with
a perfectly immobile face, and a man incredibly dirty
and apparently incredibly old, with a tobaccostamed goats
beard and mad eyes They enter not with diffidence, but
with something puppethke about them, as if they were op-
erated by clumsy sprmgwork The woman appears to be
the more assured, or at least the more conscious, of the two
of them It is as though, for all her frozen and mechanically
moved inertia, she had come for some definite purpose or
at least with some vague hope But he sees at once that the
man is in something like coma, as though oblivious and ut-
terly indifferent to his whereabouts, and yet withal a qual-
ity latent and explosive, paradoxically rapt and alert at the
same time

"This is her/' Byron says quietly "This is Mrs Hines *

They stand there, motionless the woman as though she
had reached the end of a long journey and now among
strange faces and surroundings waits, quiet, glacierlike, like
something made of stone and painted, and the calm, rapt
yet latently furious and dirty old man It is as though
neither of them had so much as looked at him, with curi-
osity or without He indicates chairs Byron guides the
woman, who lowers herself carefully, clutching the um*



324

brella The man sits at onee Hightower takes his chair be-
yond the desk “What is it she wants to talk to me about?”
he says

The woman does not move Apparently she has not
heard She is like someone who has performed an arduous
journey on the strength of a promise and who now ceases
completely and waits ‘This is him,” Byron says “This is
Reverend Hightower Tell him Tell him what you want
him to know ” She looks at Byron when he speaks, her face
quite blank If there is inarticulateness behind it, articulate-
ness is nullified by the immobility of the face itself, if hope
or yearning, neither hope nor yearning show “Tell him,”
Byron says “Tell him why you came What you came to
Jefferson for ”

“It was because — ” she says Her voice is sudden and
deep, almost harsh, though not loud It is as though she
had not expected to make so much noise when she spoke,
she ceases in a sort of astonishment as though at the sound
of her own voice, looking from one to the other of the two
faces

'Tell me,” Hightower says ‘Try to tell me ”

“Its because I ” Again the voice ceases, dies harshly
though still not raised, as though of its own astonishment
It is as if the three words were some automatic impediment
which her voice cannot pass, they can almost watch her
marshalling herself to go around them “I amt never seen
him when he could walk,” she says “Not for thirty years I
never saw him Never once walking on his own feet and
calling his own name — ”

“Bitchery and abomination!” the man says suddenly His
voice is high, shrill, strong “Bitchery and abomination!”
Then he ceases Out of his immediate and dreamlike state
he shouts the three words with outrageous and prophet-
like suddenness, and that is all Hightower looks at him*
and then at Byron Byron says quietly



S25

“He is their daughter s child He — ” with a slight move-
ment of the head he mdicates the old man, who is now
watching Hightower with his bright, mad glare — “he took
it right after it was bom and carried it away She didn't
know what he did with it She never even knew if it was
still alive or not until — ”

The old man intei rupts again, with that startling sudden-
ness But he does not shout this time his voice now is su
calm and logical as Byron's own He talks clearly, just a
little jerkily “Yes Old Doc Hines took him God give old
Doc Hines his chance and so old Doc Hines give God His
chance too So out of the mouths of little children God used
His will The little children hollering Nigger* Nigger* at him
in the hearing of God and man both, showing Gods will
And old Doc Hmes said to God, ‘But that amt enough
Them children call one another worse than nigger,’ mid
God said, Tou wait and you watch, because I amt got
the time to waste neither with this world’s sluttishness and
bitchery I have put the mark on him and now I am going
to put the knowledge And I have set you there to watch
and guard My will It will be yours to tend to it and over-
see ’ ” His voice ceases, his tone does not drop at all His
voice just stops, exactly like when the needle is lifted from
a phonograph record by the hand of someone who is not
listening to the record Hightower looks from him to Byron,
also almost glaring

“Whats this? What’s this?” he says

“I wanted to fix it so she could come and talk to you
without him being along,” Byron says “But there wasn’t
anywhere to leave him She says she has to watch him He
was trying down m Mottstown yesterday to get the folks
worked up to lynch him, before be even knew what he had
done ”

“Lynch him?” Hightower says “Lynch his own grand-
son?”



S26

"That’s what she says/’ Byron says levelly "She says that’s
what he come up here for And she had to come with him
to keep him from doing it ”

The woman speaks again Perhaps she has been listening
But there is no more expression on her face now than when
she entered, woodenfaced, she speaks again m her dead
voice, with almost the suddenness of the man "For fifty
years he has been like that For more than fifty years, but
for fifty years I have suffered it Even before we were mar-
ried, he was always fighting On the very night that Milly
was bom, he was locked up m jail for fighting That’s what
I have bore and suffered He said he had to fight because
he is littler than most men and so folks would try to put on
him That was his vanity and his pride But I told him it
was because the devil was in him And that some day the
devil was gomg to come on him and him not know it until
too late, and the devil was gomg to say, ‘Eupheus Hmes, I
have come to collect my toll ’ That’s what I told him, the
next day after Milly was born and me still too weak to raise
my head, and him just out of jail again I told him so how
right then God had given him a sign and a warning that
him bemg locked up in a jail on the very hour and minute
of his daughter’s birth was the Lord’s own token that
heaven never thought him fitten to raise a daughter A sign
from God above that town (he was a brakeman then, on
the railroad) was not doing him anything but harm And
he took it so himself then, because it was a sign, and we
moved away from the towns then and after a while he got
to be foreman at the sawmill, doing well because he hadn’t
begun then to take God’s name m vain and m pride to jus-
tify and excuse the devil that was m him So when Lem
Bush’s wagon passed that night coming home from the cir-
cus and never stopped to let Milly out and Eupheus come
back into the house and flung the things out of the drawer
until he come to the pistol, I said, ‘Eupheus, it’s the devil



327

It s not Milly’s safety that’s quicking you now/ and he said,
‘Devil or no devil Devil or no devil/ and he hit me with his
hand and I laid across the bed and watched him — ? She
ceases But hers is on a falling inflection, as if the machine
had run down m midrecord Again Hightower looks from
her to Byron with that expression of glaring amazement
‘That’s how I heard it too/’ Byron says Tt was hard for
me to get it straight too, at first They were living at a saw-
mill that he was foreman of, over in Arkansas The gal was
about eighteen then One night a circus passed the mill, on
the way to town It was December and there had been a
lot of ram, and one of the wagons broke through a bridge
close to the mill and the men come to their house to wake
him up and borrow some log tackle to get the wagon out — ”
Tt’s God’s abomination of womanflesW ” the old man cries
suddenly Then his voice drops, lowers, it is as though he
were merely gaming attention He talks again rapidly, his
tone plausible, vague, fanatic, speaking of himself agam m
the thud person “He knowed Old Doc Hines knowed He
had seen the womansign of God’s abomination already on
her, under her clothes So when he went and put on his
raincoat and lit the lantern and come back, she was already
at the door, with a ramcoat on too and he said, Tou get on
back to bed/ and she said, 1 want to go too/ and he said,
Ton get on back inside that room/ and she went back and
he went down and got the big tackle from the mill and got
the wagon out Till nigh daybreak he worked, believing she
had obeyed the command of the father the Lord had given
her Bat he ought to knowed He ought to knowed God’s
abomination of womanflesh; he should have knowed the
walking shape of bitchery and abomination already stink-
ing m God’s sight Telling old Doc Hines, that knowed bet-
ter, that he was a Mexican When old Doc Hines could see
in his face the black curse of God Almighty Telling him — *
“What?” Hightower says He speaks loudly, as if he had



328

anticipated having to drown the other s voice by sheer vol-
ume “What is this?”

“It was a fellow with the circus,” Byron says “She told
him that the man was a Mexican, the daughter told him
when he caught her Maybe that’s what the fellow told the
gal But he” — again he indicates the old man — “knew some-
how that the fellow had nigger blood Maybe the circus
folks told him I dont know He amt never said how he
found out, like that never made any diifeience And I
reckon it didn’t, after the next night ”

“The next night?”

“I reckon she slipped out that night when the circus was
stuck He says she did Anyway, he acted like it, and what
be did could not have happened if he hadn’t known and
she hadn’t slipped out Because the next day she went m to
the circus with some neighbois He let her go, because he
didn’t know then that she had slipped out the night before
He didn’t suspect anything even when she came out to get
into the neighbor’s wagon with her Sunday dress on But
he was waiting for the wagon when it came back that night,
listening for it, when it came up the road and passed the
house like it was not going to stop to let her out And he
ran out and called, and the neighbor stopped the wagon
and the gal wasn’t m it The neighbor said that she had
left them on the circus lot, to spend the night with another
girl that lived about six miles away, and the neighbor won-
dered how Hines didn’t know about it, because he said that
the gal had her gnp with her when she got into the wagon
Hines hadn’t seen the gnp And she — ” this time he indi-
cates the stonefaced woman, she may or may not be listen-
ing to what he is saying — “she says it was the devil that
guided him She says he could not have known any more
than she did, where the gal was then, and yet he come into
the house and got his pistol and knocked her down across
the bed when she tned to stop him and saddled his horse



329

and rode off And she said he took the onfy short cut he
could possibly have taken, choosing it m the dark, out of a
half a dozen of them, that would e\er ha\e caught up with
them And yet it wasn’t any possible way that he could have
known which road they had taken But he did He found
them like he had known all the time just where they would
be, like him and the man that his gal told him was a Mexi-
can had made a date to meet there It was like he knew It
was pitch dark, and even when he caught up with a buggy,
there wasn’t any way he could have told it was the one he
wanted But he rode right up behind the buggy, the first
buggy he had seen that night He rode up on the right side
of it and he leaned down, still m the pitch dark and with-
out saying a word and without stopping his horse, and
grabbed the man that might have been a stranger or a
neighbor for all he could have known by sight or hearing
Grabbed him by one hand and held the pistol against him
with the other and shot him dead and brought the gal back
home behind him on the horse He left the buggy and the
man both there m the road It was raining again, too *

He ceases At once the woman begins to speak, as though
she has been waiting with rigid impatience for Byron to
cease She speaks m the same dead, level tone the two
voices m monotonous strophe and antistrophe two bodi-
less voices recounting dreamily something performed m a
region without dimension by people without blood "I laid
across the bed and I heard him go out and then I heard the
horse come up from the barn and pass the house, already
galloping And I laid there without undressing, watching
die lamp The oil was getting low and after a while I got
up and took it back to the kitchen and filled it and cleaned
the wick and then I undressed and laid down, with the
lamp burning It was still raining and it was cold too and
after a while I heard the horse come back into the yard and
stop at the porch and I got up and put on my shawl and I



330

heard them t ome mto the house I could hear Eupheus’ feet
and then Milly's feet, and they come on down the hall to
the door and Milly stood there with the ram on her face
and her hair and her new dress all muddy and her eyes
shut and then Eupheus hit her and she fell to the floor and
laid there and she didn't look any different m the face than
when she was standing up And Eupheus standing in the
door wet and muddy too and he said, 'You said I was at
the devil's work Well, I ha\e brought you back the devil's
laidby crop Ask her what she is to tog now inside hei Ask
her ’ And I was that tired, and it was cold, and I said, 'What
happened^ and he said, 'Go back yonder and look down in
the mud and you will see He might have fooled her that
he was a Mexican But he never fooled me And he never
fooled her He never had to Because you said once that
some day the devil would come down on me for his toll
Well, he has My wife has bore me a whore But at least he
done what he could when the time come to collect He
showed me the right road and he held the pistol steady"
"And so sometimes I would think how the devil had con-
quered God Because we found out Milly was going to have
a child and Eupheus started out to find a doctor that would
fix it I believed that he would find one, and sometimes I
thought it would be better so, if human man and woman
was to live m the world And sometimes I hoped he would,
me being that tired and all when the trial was over and the
arcus owner come back and said how the man really was
a part nigger instead of Mexican, hke Eupheus said all the
tune he was, hke the devil had told Eupheus he was a nig-
ger And Eupheus would take the pistol again and say he
would find a doctor or kill one, and he would go away and
be gone a week at a time, and all the folks knowing it and
me trying to get Eupheus to lets move away because it was
just that circus man that said he was a nigger and maybe
he never knew for certain, and besides he was gone too



331

and we likely wouldn’t ever see him again But Eupheus
wouldn’t move, and Miily’s time coming and Eupheus with
that pistol, trying to find a doctor that would do it And
then I heard how he was in jail again, how he had been go-
ing to church and to prayer meeting at the different places
where he would be trying to find a doctor, and how one
mght he got up during prayer meeting and went to the
pulpit and begun to preach himself, yelling against niggers,
for the white folks to turn out and kill them all, and the
folks m the church made him quit and come down from
the pulpit and he threatened them with the pistol, there m
the church, until the law came and arrested him and him
like a crazy man for a while And they found out how he
had beat up a doctor m another town and run away before
they could catch him So when he got out of jail and got
back home Milly’s time was about on her And I thought
then that he had give up, had seen God’s will at last, be-
cause he was quiet about the house, and one day he found
the clothes me and Milly had been getting ready and kept
hid from him, and he never said nothing except to ask
when it would be Every day he would ask, and we thought
that he had give up, that maybe going to them churches or
being m jail again had reconciled him like it had on that
rught when Milly was bom And so the time come and one
mght Milly waked me and told me it had started and I
dressed and told Eupheus to go for the doctor and he
dressed and went out And I got everything ready and we
waited and the tune when Eupheus and the doctor should
have got back come and passed and Eupheus wasn’t back
neither and I waited until the doctor would have to get
there pretty soon and then I went out to the front porch
to look and I saw Eupheus setting on the top step with
the shotgun across his lap and he said, ‘Get back into that
house, whore’s dam/ and I said, ‘Eupheus/ and he raised
the shotgun and said, ‘Get back into that house Let the



332

devil gather his own crop he was the one that laid it by ’
And I tried to get out the back way and he heard me and
run around the house with the gun and he hit me with the
barrel of it and I went back to Milly and he stood outside
the hall door where he could see Milly until she died And
then he come in to the bed and looked at the baby and he
picked it up and held it up, higher than the lamp, like he
was waiting to see if the devil or the Lord would wm And
I was that tired, setting by the bed, looking at his shadow
on the wall and the shadow of his arms and the bundle
high up on the wall And then I thought that the Lord had
won But now I dont know Because he laid the baby back
on the bed by Milly and he went out I heard him go out
the front door and then I got up and built up the fire m the
stove and heated some milk ” She ceases, her harsh, dron-
ing voice dies Across the desk Hightower watches her the
still, stonefaced woman in the purple dress, who has not
moved since she entered the room Then she begins to
speak again, without moving, almost without lip movement,
as if she were a puppet and the voice that of a ventriloquist
in the next room

“And Eupheus was gone The man that owned the mill
didn't know where he had gone to And he got a new fore-
man, but he let me stay m the house a while longer because
we didn't know where Eupheus was, and it coming winter
and me with the baby to take care of And I didn't know
where Eupheus was any more than Mr Gillman did, until
the letter came. It was from Memphis and it had a post-
office moneypaper in it, and that was all So I still didn't
know And then in November another moneypaper came,
without any letter or anything And I was that tired, and
then two days before Christmas I was out m the back yard,
chopping wood, and I come back mto the house and the
baby was gone. I hadn't been out of the house an hour, and
it looked like I could have seen him when he come and



333

went But I didn’t I just found the letter where Eupheus
had left it on the pillow that I would put between the baby
and the edge of the bed so he couldn’t roll off, and I was
that tired And I waited, and after Christmas Eupheus come
home, and he wouldn’t tell me He just said that we were
going to move, and I thought that he had already took the
baby there and he had come back for me And he wouldn’t
tell me where we were going to move to but it didn’t take
long and I was worried mgh ciazy how the baby would get
along until we got there and he still wouldn’t tell me and it
was like we wouldn’t ever get there Then we got there and
the baby wasn’t there and I said, ‘You tell me what you
have done with Joey You got to tell me,’ and he looked at
me like he looked at Milly that night when she laid on the
bed and died and he said. It’s the Lord God’s abomination,
and I am the instrument of His will ’ And he went away the
next day and I didn’t know wheie he had gone, and another
moneypaper came, and the next month Eupheus come
home and said he was working m Memphis And 1 knew
he had Joey hid somewhere m Memphis and I thought that
that was something because he could be there to see to Joey
even if I wasn’t And I knew that I would have to wait on
Eupheus’ will to know, and each time I would think that
maybe next time he will take me with him to Memphis And
so I waited I sewed and made clothes for Joey and I would
have them all ready when Eupheus would come home and
I would try to get him to tell me if the clothes fit Joey and
if he was all right and Eupheus wouldn’t tell me He would
sit and read out of the Bible, loud, without nobody there
to hear it but me, reading and hollering loud out of the
Bible like he believed I didn’t beheve what it said But he
would not tell me for five years and I never knew whether
he took Joey the clothes I made or not And I was afraid
to ask, to worry at him, because it was something that he
was there where Joey was, even if I wasn’t And then aftet



334

five years he came home one day and he said, "We are going
to move/ and I thought that now it would be, I will see him
again now, if it was a sm, I reckon we have all paid it out
now, and I even forgave Eupheus Because I thought that
we were going to Memphis this time, at last But it was
not to Memphis We come to Mottstown We had to pass
through Memphis, and I begged him It was the first tune
I had ever begged him But I did then, just for a minute, a
second, not to touch him or talk to him or nothing But
Eupheus wouldn't We never even left the depot We got
off of one tram and we waited seven hours without even
leaving the depot, until the other tram come, and we come
to Mottstown And Eupheus never went back to Memphis
to work any more, and after a while I said, "Eupheus/ and
he looked at me and I said, "I done waited five years and
I amt never bothered you Cant you tell me just once if he
is dead or not?' and he said, "He is dead/ and I said, "Dead
to the living world, or just dead to me? If he is just dead to
me, even Tell me that much, because m five years I have
not bothered you/ and he said, "He is dead to you and to
me and to God and to all God's world forever and ever
more

She ceases again Beyond the desk Hightower watches
her with that quiet and desperate amazement Byron too
is motionless, his head bent a little The three of them are
like three rocks above a beach, above ebbtide, save the old
man He has been listening now, almost attentively, with
that ability of his to flux instantaneously between complete
attention that does not seem to hear, and that comalike be-
musement in which the stare of his apparently inverted eye
is as uncomfortable as though he held them with his hand
He cackles, suddenly, bright, loud, mad, he speaks, incredi-
bly old, incredibly dirty "It was the Lord He was there*
Old Doc Hines give God His chance too The Lord told old
Doc Hines what to do and old Doc Hines done it Then



S35

the Lord said to old Doc Hines, “You watch, now Watch
My will a-workmg ’ And old Doc Hines watched and heard
the mouths of little children, of Gods own fatherless and
motherless, putting His words and knowledge into their
mouths even when they couldn’t know it since they were
without sm yet, even the girl ones without sm and bitehery
yet Nigger! Nigger* in the innocent mouths of little chil-
dren What did I tell you?’ God said to old Doc Hmes ‘And
now Ive set My will to working and now I’m gone There
amt enough sin here to keep Me busy because what do I
care for the fornications of a slut, smce that is a part of
My purpose too/ and old Doc Hmes said, ‘How is the for-
nications of a slut a part of Your purpose too?’ and God
said, You wait and see Do you think it is just chances o that
I sent that young doctor to be the one that found My abom-
ination laying wrapped m that blanket on that doorstep
that Christmas night? Do you think it was just chaneeso
that the Madam should have been away that night and give
them young sluts the chance and call to name him Christ-
mas m sacrilege of My Son? So I am gone now, because I
have set My will a-workmg and I can leave you here to
watch it ’ So old Doc Hmes he watched and he waited
From God’s own boiler room be watched them children,
and the devil’s walking seed unbeknownst among them,
polluting the earth with the working of that word on him
Because he didn’t play with the other children no more
now He stayed by himself, standing still, and then old Doc
Hmes knew that he was listening to the hidden warning of
God’s doom, and old Doc Hmes said to him, ‘Why dont
you play with them other children like you used to?’ and
he didn’t say nothing and old Doc Hmes said, Ts it because
they call you nigger?’ and he didn’t say nothing and old
Doc Hmes said, ‘Do you think you are a nigger because
God has marked your face? 5 and he said. Is God a nigger
too?’ and old Doc Hmes said, ‘He is the Lord God of wrath-



336

ful hosts, His will be done Not yours and not mine, because
you and me are both a part of His purpose and His venge-
ance 5 And he went away and old Doc Hmes watched him
hearing and listening to the vengeful will of the Lord, until
old Doc Hmes found out how he was watching the nigger
working m the yard, following him around the yard while
he worked, until at last the nigger said, ‘What you watching
me for, boy? 7 and he said, ‘How come you are a nigger?
and the nigger said, ‘Who told you I am a nigger, you little
white trash bastaid? 7 and he says, 1 amt a nigger/ and the
nigger says, ‘You are worse than that You dont know what
you are And more than that, you wont never know Youll
live and youll die and you wont never know/ and he says,
God amt no mgger/ and the niggei says, 1 reckon you
ought to know what God is, because dont nobody but
God know what you is 7 But God wasn’t there to say, be-
cause He had set His will to working and left old Doc Hmes
to watch it From that very first night, when He had chose
His own Son’s sacred anniversary to set it a-workmg on,
He set old Doc Hmes to watch it It was cold that night,
and old Doc Hines standing m the dark just behind the
comer where he could see the doorstep and the accomplish-
ment of the Lord’s will, and he saw that young doctor com-
ing m lecheiy and fornication stop and stoop down and
raise the Lord’s abomination and tote it into the house. And
old Doc Hmes he followed and he seen and he heard He
watched them young sluts that was desecrating the Loid’s
sacred anniversary with eggnog and whiskey m the Mad-
am’s absence, open the blanket And it was her, the Jezebel
of the doctor, that was the Lord’s instrument, that said,
‘Well name him Christmas/ and another one said, What
Christmas Christmas what/ and God said to old Doc Hmes,
"Tell them, 7 and they all looked at old Doc Hmes with the
reek of pollution on them, hollering, ‘Why, it’s Uncle Doc
Look what Santa Claus brought us and left on the doorstep,



837

Uncle Doc,’ and old Doc Hines said. His name is Joseph,
and they quit laughing and they looked at old Doc Hmes
and the Jezebel said, How do you know?* and old Doc
Hmes said, ‘The Lord says so,’ and then they laughed again,
hollering, ‘It is so m the Book Christmas, the son of Joe
Joe, the son of Joe Joe Christmas, they said, ‘To Joe Christ
mas,’ and they tried to make old Doc Hmes drink too, to
the Lord’s abomination, but he struck the cup aside And
he just had to watch and to wait, and he did and it was
in the Lord’s good time, for evil to come from evil And
the doctor s Jezebel come running from her lustful bed stall
astrnk with sm and fear He was hid behind the bed,’ she
says, and old Doc Hmes said, You used that perfumed soap
that tempted your own undoing, for the Lord’s abomination
and outrage Suffer it,’ and she said, *You can talk to him I
have seen you You could persuade him,’ and old Doe Hmes
said, 'I care no more for your fornications than God does,’
and she said. He will tell and I will be fired I will be dis-
graced ’ Stinking with her lust and lechery she was then,
standing before old Doc Hmes with the working of God’s
will on her that minute, who had outraged the house where
God housed His fatherless and motherless You amt noth-
ing,’ old Doc Hmes said ‘You and all sluts You are a mstru
ment of God’s wrathful purpose that nere a sparrow can
fall to earth You are a instrument of God, the same as Joe
Christmas and old Doc Hmes.’ And she went away and old
Doc Hmes he waited and he watched and it wasn’t long
before she come back and her face was like the face of a
ravening beast of the desert ‘I fixed him,’ she said, and old
Doc Hmes said. How fixed him,’ because it was not any-
thing that old Doc Hmes didn’t know because the Lord
did not keep His purpose hid from His chosen instrument,
and old Doc Hmes said, You have served the foreordained
will of God You can go now and abominate Him m peace
until the Day,’ and her face looked like the ravening beast



838

of the desert, laughing out of her rotten colored dirt at God
And they come and took him away Old Doc Hmes saw him
go away in the buggy and he went back to wait for God
and God come and He said to old Doc Hmes, "You can go
too now You have done My work There is no more evil
here now but womanevil, not worthy for My chosen instru-
ment to watch ' And old Doc Hmes went when God told
him to go But he kept in touch with God and at night he
said, "That bastard. Lord/ and God said, "He is still walking
My earth/ and old Doc Hmes kept m touch with God and
at night he said, That Dastard, Lord/ and God said, ‘He is
still walking My earth/ and old Doc Hmes kept m touch
with God and one night he wrestled and he strove and he
cried aloud, "That bastard, Lordl I feel! I feel the teeth and
the fangs of evil!’ and God said, "Its that bastard Your
work is not done yet He's a pollution and a abomination
on My earth * *

The sound of music from the distant church has long
smce ceased Through the open window there comes now
only the peaceful and myriad sounds of the summer night
Beyond the desk Hightower sits, looking more than ever
like an awkward beast tricked and befooled of the need for
flight, brought now to bay by those who tricked and fooled
it The other three sit facing him, almost like a jury Two of
them are also motionless, the woman with that stonevisaged
patience of a waiting rock, the old man with a spent quality
like a charred wick of a candle from which the flame has
been violently blown away Byron alone seems to possess
life His face is lowered He seems to muse upon one hand
which lies upon his lap, the thumb and forefinger of which
fub slowly together with a kneading motion while he ap-
pears to watch with musing absorption When Hightower
speaks, Byron knows that he is not addressing him, not ad-
dressing anyone m the room at all ""What do they want me



839

to do?” he says “What do they think, hope, believe, that 1
can do?”

Then there is no sound, neither the man nor the woman
have heard, apparently Byron does not expect the man to
hear c He dont need any help/ he thinks ‘Not him It's hin-
drance he needs’, thinking remembering the comastate of
dreamy yet maniacal suspension m which the old man had
moved from place to place a little behind the woman since
he had met them twehe hours ago It’s hindrance he needs
I reckon it’s a good thing for more folks than her that he
is wellmgh helpless ’ He is watching the woman He says
quietly, almost gently “Go on Tell him what you want
He wants to know what you want him to do Tell him ”

“I thought maybe — •” she says She speaks without stir-
ring Her voice is not tentative so much as rusty, as if it
were bemg forced to try to say something outside the
province of being said aloud, of being anything save felt,
known “Mr Bunch said that maybe — ”

“What?” Hightower says He speaks sharply, impatiently,
his voice a little high, he too has not moved, sitting back in
the chair, his hands upon the armrests “What? That what?”

“I thought ” The voice dies again Beyond the win-
dow the steady msects whirr Then the voice goes on, flat,
toneless, she sitting also with her head bent a little, as if
she too listened to the voice with the same quiet intentness 4
“He is my grandson, my girl’s little hoy I just thought that
if I if he ” Byron listens quietly, thinking Ifs
right funny Youd think they had done got swapped some-
where Like it was him that had a tugger grandson wait-
ing to be hung The voice goes on “I know it amt right to
bother a stranger But you are lucky A bachelor, a smgle
man that could grow old without the despair of love But
I reckon you couldn’t never see it even if I could tell it
right I just thought that maybe if it could he for one day
like it hadn’t happened Like folks never knew him as *



340

man that had Jailed * The voice ceases again She has
nor stn red It is as though she listened to it cease as she lis-
tened to it begin, with the same interest, the same quiet un-
astonishment

"Go on,” Hightower says, m that high impatient voice,
"go on 55

"I nevei saw him when he could walk and talk Not for
thirty years I never saw him I am not saying he never did
what they say he did Ought not to suffer for it like he
made them that loved and lost suffei But if folks could
maybe just let him for one day Like it hadn't happened yet
Like the world never had anythmg against him yet Then
it could be like he had just went on a trip and grew man
grown and come back If it could be like that for just one
day After that I would not interfere If he done it, I would
not be the one to come between him and what he must suf-
fer Just for one day, you see Like he had been on a trip
and come back, telling me about the trip, without any liv-
ing earth against him yet ”

"Oh,” Hightower says, in his shrill, high voice Though
he has not moved, though the knuckles of the hands which
grip the chairarms are taut and white, there begins to
emeige from beneath Ins clothing a slow and repressed
quivering "Ah, yes,” he says "Thats all That's simple Sim-
ple Simple ” Apparently he cannot stop saying it "Simple
Simple ” He has been speaking m a low tone, now his voice
uses "What is it they want me to do? What must I do now^
ByronJ Byron' 3 What is it? What are they asking of me
now?” Byron has risen He now stands beside the desk, his
hands on the desk, facing Hightower Still Hightower does
not move save for that steadily increasing quivering of his
flabby body "All, yes I should have known It will be
Byron who will ask it I should have known That will be
reserved for Byron and for me Come, come Out with it
Why do you hesitate now?”



Byron looks down at the desk, at his hands upon the
desk “It’s a poor thing A poor thing ”

“Ah Commiseration? After this long time? Commisera-
tion for me, or for Byron? Come, out with it What do you
want me to do? For it is you I know that I have known
that all along Ah Byron, Byron What a dramatist you
would have made ”

“Or maybe you mean a drummer, a agent, a salesman/
Byron says “It’s a poor thing I know that You dont need
to tell me ”

“But I am not clairvoyant, like you You seem to know
already what I could tell you, yet you will not tell me what
you intend for me to know What is it you want me to do?
Shall I go plead guilty to the murder? Is that it?”

Byron’s face cracks with that grimace faint, fleeting, sar-
donic, weary, without mirth “It’s next to that, I reckon”
Then his face sobers, it is quite grave “It’s a poor thing to
ask God knows I know that” He watches his slow hand
where it moves, preoccupied and trivial, upon the desk top
“I mmd how I said to you once that there is a price for be-
ing good the same as for being bad, a cost to pay And it’s
the good men that cant deny the bill when it comes around
They cant deny it for the reason that there amt any way to
make them pay it, like a honest man that gambles The
bad men can deny it, that’s why dont anybody expect them
to pay on sight or any other time But the good cant Maybe
it takes longer to pay for bemg good than for being bad
And it wont be like you haven’t done it before, haven’t al-
ready paid a bill like it once before It oughtn’t to be so bad
now as it was then ”

“Go on Go on What is it I am to do?”

Byron watches his slow and ceaseless hand, musing “He
amt never admitted that he killed her And all the evidence
they got against him is Brown’s word, which is next to none
You could say he was here with you that night Every night



342

when Brown said he watched him go up to the big house
and go in it Folks would believe you They would believe
that, anyway They would rather believe that about you
than to believe that he lived with her like a husband and
then killed her And you are old now They wouldn’t do
anything to you about it that would hurt you now And I
reckon you are used to everything else they can do”
"Oh,” Hightower says "Ah Yes Yes They would believe
it That would be very simple, very good Good for all Then
he will be restored to them who have suffered because of
him, and Brown without the reward could be scared into
making her child legitimate and then into fleeing again and
forever this time And then it would be just her and Byron
Since I am just an old man who has been fortunate enough
to grow old without having to learn the despair of love”
He is shaking, steadily, he looks up now In the lamplight
his face looks slick, as if it had been oiled Wrung and
twisted, it gleams m the lamplight, the yellowed, oftwashed
shirt which was fresh tins morning is damp with sweat "Its
not because I cant, dont daie to,” he says, "its because I
wont! I wont* do you hear?” He raises his hands from the
chairarms “It s because I wont do it!” Byron does not move.
His hand on the desk top has ceased, he watches the other,
thinking It amt me he is shouting at It's like he knows
there is something nearer him than me to convince of that
Because now Hightower is shouting, "I wont do it! I wont!”
with his hands raised and clenched, his face sweating, his
lip lifted upon his clenched and rotting teeth from about
which the long sagging of flabby and puttycolored flesh
falls away Suddenly his voice rises higher yet "Get out!”
he screams "Get out of my house* Get out of my house!”
Then he falls forward, onto the desk. Ins face between his
extended arms and his clenched fists As, the two old people
moving ahead of him, Byron looks back from the door, he



343

sees that Hightower has not moved, his bald head and his
extended and clenchfisted arms lying full in the pool of
light from the shaded lamp Beyond the open window the
sound of insects has not ceased, not faltered



17


THAT WAS SUNDAY NIGHT LENA’S CHILD WAS BORN THE NEXT

morning It was just dawn when Byron stopped his gallop-
ing mule before the house which he had quitted not six
hours ago He sprang to the ground already running, and
ran up the narrow walk toward the dark porch He seemed
to stand aloof and watch himself, for all his haste, thinking
with a kind of grim unsurprise ‘Byron Bunch bornmg a
baby If I could have seen myself now two weeks ago, I
would not have believed my own eyes I would have told
them that they lied 5

The window was dark now beyond which six hours ago
he had left the minister Running, he thought of the bald
head, the clenched hands, the prone flabby body sprawled
across the desk ‘But I reckon he has not slept much/ he
thought ‘Even if he amt playing — playing — • He could not
think of die word midwife, which he knew that Hightower
would use T reckon I dont have to think of it/ he thought
‘Like a fellow running from or toward a gun amt got time
to worry whether the word for what he is domg is courage
or cowardice *

The door was not locked Apparently he knew that it
Would not be He felt his way into the hall, not quiet, not
344



345


attempting to be He had never been deeper into the house
than the room where he had last seen the owner of it
sprawled across the desk in the full downglare of the lamp
Yet he went almost as straight to the right door as if he
knew, or could see, or were being led ‘That's what he'd call
it,' he thought, m the fumbling and hurned dark ‘And she
would too ' He meant Lena, lying yonder m the cabin, al-
ready beginning to labor ‘Only they would both have a
different name for whoever did the leadmg ' He could hear
Hightower snoring now, before he entered the room ‘Like
he amt so much upset, after all,' he thought Then he
thought immediately ‘No That amt light That amt just
Because I dont believe that I know that the reason he is
asleep and I amt asleep is that he is an old man and he cant
stand as much as I can stand '

He approached the bed The still invisible occupant
snored profoundly There was a quality of profound and
complete surrender m it Not of exhaustion, but surrender,
as though he had given over and relinquished completely
that grip upon that blending of pride and hope and vanity
and fear, that strength to chug to either defeat or victory,
which is the I- Am and the relinquishment of which is usu-
ally death Standing beside the Jied Byron thought again
A poor thing A poor thing It seemed to him now that to
wake the man from that sleep would be the sorest injury
which he had ever done him ‘But it amt me that's waiting/
he thought ‘God knows that Because I reckon He has been
watching me too lately, like the rest of them, to see what L
will do next '

He touched the sleeper, not roughly, but firmly High-
tower ceased m midsnore, beneath Byron's hand he surged
hugely and suddenly up “Yes?" he said “What? Who is it?
Who is there?”

‘It's me," Byron said “It's Byron again Are you awake
now?”



346


“Yes What—"

“Yes/’ Byron said “She says it’s about due now That the
tune has come "

“She?"

“Tell me where the light Mrs Hines She is out there
I am gomg on for the doctor But it may take some time
So you can take my mule I reckon }Ou can ride that far
Have you still got j our book?"

The bed creaked as Hightower moved “Book? My
book?"

“The book you used when that nigger baby came I just
wanted to remind you m case you would need to take it
with you In case I dont get back with the doctor in tune
The mule is out at the gate He knows the way I will walk
on to town and get the doctor 111 get back out there as
soon as I can " He turned and recrossed the room He could
hear, feel, the other sitting up m the bed He paused m the
middle of die floor long enough to find the suspended light
and turn it on When it came on he was already moving
on toward the door He did not look back Behind him he
heard Hightowers voice

“Byron! Byron!" He didn't pause, didn't answer

Dawn was increasing He walked rapidly along the
empty street, beneath the spaced and failing street lamps
about winch bugs still whirled and blundered But day was
growing, when he reached the square the fa$ade of its
eastern side was in sharp relief against the sky He was
thinking rapidly He had made no arrangement with a doc-
tor Now as he walked he was cursing himself m all the
mixed tenor and rage of any actual young father for what
he now believed to have been crass and criminal negli-
gence, Yet it was not exactly the solicitude of an incipient
father There was something else behind it, which he was
not to recognise until later It was as though there lurked
m his mind, still obscured by the need for haste, something



347


which was about to spring full clawed upon him But what
he was thmlang was, T got to decide quick He delivered
that nigger baby all right, they said But this is different I
ought to done it last week, seen ahead about a doctor in-
stead of waiting, having to explain now, at the last minute,
hunt from house to house until I find one that will come,
that will believe the lies that I will have to tell I be dog if
it dont look like a man that has done as much lying lately
as I have could tell a he now that anybody would believe,
man or woman But it dont look like I can I reckon it just
amt m me to tell a good lie and do it well 5 He walked rap-
idly, his footsteps hollow and lonely m the empty street, al-
ready his decision was made, without his even bemg aware
of it To him there was nothing either of paradox or of com-
edy about it It had entered his mind too quickly and was
too firmly established there when he became aware of it,
his feet were already obeying it They were taking him to
the home of the same doctor who had arrived too late at the
delivery of the Negro child at which Hightower had offici-
ated with his razor and his book
The doctor arrived too late this time, also Byron had to
wait for him to dress He was an oldish man now, and
fussy, and somewhat disgruntled at having been wakened
at this hour Then he had to hunt for the switch key to his
car, which he kept m a small metal strong box, die key to
which m turn he could not find at once Neither would he
allow Byron to break the lock So when they reached the
cabin at last the east was prunrosecolor and there was al-
ready a hint of the swift sun of summer And again the two
men, both older now, met at the door of a one-room cabin,
the professional having lost again to the amateur, for as he
entered the door, the doctor heard the infant cry The doc-
tor blinked at the minister, fretfully “Well, doctor/’ he
said, “I wish Byron had told me he had already called you
in I’d still be m bed ” He thrust past the minister, entering



348

*You seem to Lave had better luck this time than you did
the last time we consulted Only you look about like you
need a doctor yourself Or maybe it’s a cup of coffee you
need "" Hightower said something, but the doctor had gone
on, without stopping to listen He entered the 100m, where
e young woman whom he had never seen befoie lay wan
and spent on a narrow army cot, and an old woman m a
purple dress whom he had also never seen before, held the
child upon her lap There was an old man asleep on a
second cot m the shadow When the doctor noticed him,
he said to himself that the man looked like he was dead,
so profoundly and peacefully did he sleep But the doctor
did not notice the old man at once He went to the old
woman who held the child “Well, well/" he said “Byron
*nust have been excited He never told me the whole family
would be on hand, grandpa and grandma too "" The woman
looked up at him He thought, 'She looks about as much
alive as he does, for all she is sitting up Dont look like she
has got enough gumption to know she is even a parent, let
alone a grandparent"

“Yes/" the woman said She looked up at him, crouchmg
ovei the child Then he saw that her face was not stupid,
vacuous He saw that at the same time it was both peaceful
and terrible, as though the peace and the terror had both
died long ago and come to live again at the same time But
he remarked mainly her attitude at once like a rock and like
a crouching beast She jerked her head at the man, for the
first time the doctor looked full at him where he lay sleep-
ing upon the other cot She said m a whisper at once cun-
ning and tense with fading terror “I fooled him I told him
you would come in the back way this time I fooled him
But now you are here You can see to Milly now I"ll take
care of Joey "" Then this faded While he watched, the life,
the vividness, faded, fled suddenly from a face that looked
too still, too dull to ever have harbored it now the eyes



349

questioned him with a gaze dumb, inarticulate, baffled as
she crouched over the child as if he had offered to drag it
from her Her movement roused it perhaps, it cried once
Then the bafflement too flowed away It fled as smoothly
as a shadow, she looked down at the child, musmg, wooden
faced, ludicrous “It’s Joey,” she said "It’s my Milly’s little
boy”

And Byron, outside the door where he had stopped as
the doctor entered, heard that cry and something terrible
happened to him Mrs Hines had called him from his tent
There was something m her voice so that he put on his
trousers as he ran almost, and he passed Mrs Hines, who
had not undressed at all, m the cabin door and ran into the
room Then he saw her and it stopped him dead as a wall
Mrs Hmes was at his elbow, talking to him, perhaps he
answered, talked back Anyway he had saddled the mule
and was already galloping toward town while he still
seemed to be looking at her, at her face as she lay raised
on her propped arms on the cot, looking down at the shape
of hei body beneath the sheet with wailing and hopeless
terror He saw that all the time he was waking Hightower,
all the time he was getting the doctor started, while some-
where m him the clawed thmg lurked and waited and
thought was going too fast to give him time to think
That was it Thought too swift for thinking, until he and
the doctor returned to the cabin And then, just outside the
cabin door where he had stopped, he heard the child cry
once and something terrible happened to him

He knew now what it was that seemed to lurk clawed
and waiting while he crossed the empty square, seeking the
doctor whom he had neglected to engage He knew now
why he neglected to engage a doctor beforehand It is be-
cause he did not believe until Mrs Hmes called him from
his tent that he (she) would need one, would have the
need It was like for a week now his eyes had accepted her



350

belly without his mind believing e Yet I did know, believe,
he thought T must have knowed, to have done what I have
done the running and the lymg and the worrying at folks 5
But he saw now that he did not believe until he passed Mrs
Hines and looked into the cabin When Mrs Hines 3 voice
first came into his sleeping, he knew what it was, what had
happened, he rose and put on, like a pair of huuied over-
alls, the need for haste, knowing why, knowing that for five
nights now he had been expecting it Yet still he did not
believe He knew now that when he ran to die cabm and
looked in, he expected to see hei sitting up, perhaps to be
met by her at the door, placid, unchanged, timeless But
even as he touched die door with his hand he heard some-
thing which he had never heard before It was a moaning
wail, loud, with a quality at once passionate and abject,
that seemed to be speaking clearly to something m a tongue
which he knew was not his tongue nor that of any man
Then he passed Mrs Hines m the door and he saw her
lymg on the cot He had never seen her m bed before and
he believed that when or if he ever did, she would be tense,
alert, maybe smiling a little, and completely awaie of him
But when he entered she did not even look at him She
did not even seem to be aware that the door had opened,
that there was anyone or anything in the room save herself
and whatever it was that she had spoken to with that wail-
ing cry in a tongue unknown to man She was covered to
the chin, yet her upper body was raised upon her arms and
her head was bent Her hair was loose and her eyes looked
like two holes and her mouth was as bloodless now as the
pillow behind her, and as she seemed in that attitude of
alarm and surprise to contemplate with a kind of outraged
unbelief the shape of her body beneath the covers, she gave
again that loud, abject, wailing cry Mrs Hmes was now
Ending over her She turned her head, that wooden face,



351

across her purple shoulder "Get/ 5 she said "Get for the
doctor It’s come now "

He did not remember going to the stable at all Yet there
he was, catching his mule, dragging the saddle out and
clapping it on He was working fast, yet thinking went
slow enough He knew why now He knew now that think-
ing went slow and smooth with calculation, as oil is spread
slowly upon a surface above a brewing storm If I had
known then/ he thought If I had known then If it had
got through then ' He thought this quietly, m aghast de-
spair, regret "Yes I would have turned my back and rode
the othei way Beyond the knowing and memory of man
forever and ever I reckon I would have rode 5 But he did
not He passed the cabm at a gallop, with thinking going
smooth and steady, he not yet knowing why If I can just
get past and out of hearmg before she hoJleis again/ he
thought If I can just get past before I have to hear her
again ' That carried him for a while, into the road, the hard-
muscled small beast going fast now, thinking, the oil,
spreading steady and smooth Tli go to Hightower first
111 leave the mule for him I must remember to remind him
about his doctor book I mustn't forget that/ the oil said,
getting him that far, to where he sprang from the still
running mule and into Hightower s house Then he had
something else 'Now that's done/ thinking Even if I cant
get a regular doctor That got him to the square and then
betrayed him, he could feel it, clawed with lurking, think-
ing Even if I dont get a regular doctor Because I have
nevei believed that I would need one I didnt believe It
was m his mind, galloping in yoked and headlong paradox
with the need for haste while he helped the old doctor
hunt for the key to the strongbox m order to get the switch
key for the car They found it at last, and for a time the
need for haste went hand m hand with movement, speed.



352

along the empty road beneath the empty dawn — that, or he
had surrendered all reality, all dread and fear, to the doctor
beside him, as people do Anyway it got him back to the
cabin, where the two of them left the car and approached
the cabin door, beyond which the lamp still burned for
that interval he ran m the final hiatus of peace before the
blow fell and the clawed thing overtook him fiom behind
Then he heard the child cry Then he knew Dawn was
making fast He stood quietly m the chill peace, the waking
quiet — small, nondescript, whom no man or woman had
ever turned to look at twice anywhere He knew now that
there had been something all the while which had pro-
tected him against believing, with the believing protected
him With stem and austeie astonishment he thought It
was like it was not until Mrs Hines called me and I heard
her and saw her face and knew that Byion Bunch was
nothing in this world to he * right then , that 1 found out
that she is not a virgin And he thought that that was ter-
rible, but that was not all There was something else His
head was not bowed He stood quite still m the augment-
ing dawn, while thinking went quietly And this too is
reserved for me, as Reveiend Hightowei says III have to
tell him now Til have to tell Lucas Burch It was not mi-
surprise now It was something like the terrible and irreme-
diable despan of adolescence Why , I didnt even believe
until now that he was so It was like me, and her > and all
the other folks that I had to get mixed up m it, were just
% lot of words that never even stood for anything, were not
even us, while all the time what was us was going on and
going on without even missing the lack of words Yes It
amt until now that I ever believed that he is Lucas Burch
That there ever was a Lucas Burch

'Luck/ Hightower says, luck I dont know whether I
had it or not ? But the doctor has gone on into the cabin



35S

Looking back for another moment, Hightower watches the
group about the cot, hearing still the doctor s cheery voice
The old woman now sits quietly, yet looking back at her
it seems but a moment ago that he was struggling with her
for the child, lest she drop it m her dumb and furious ter-
ror But no less furious for being dumb it was as, the child
snatched almost from the mother s body, she held it high
aloft, her heavy, bearhke body crouching as she glared at
the old man asleep on the cot He was sleeping so when
Hightower arrived He did not seem to breathe at all, and
beside the cot the woman was crouching m a chair when
he entered She looked exactly like a rock poised to plunge
over a precipice, and for an instant Hightower thought
She has already killed him She has taken hei 'precautions
well beforehand this time Then he was quite busy, the
old woman was at bis elbow without bis being aware of it
until she snatched the still unbreathmg child and held it
aloft, glaring at the old sleeping man on the other cot with
the face of a tiger Then the child breathed and cried, and
the woman seemed to answer it, also in no known tongue,
savage and triumphant Her face was almost maniacal as he
struggled with her and took the child from her before she
dropped it "See,” he said ‘ Look^ He’s quiet He’s not
going to take it away this time ” Still she glared at him,
dumb, beastlike, as though she did not understand English
But the fury, the triumph, had gone from her face she
made a hoarse, whimpering noise, trying to take the child
from him "Careful now,” "Will you be careful?” She nod-
ded, whimpering, pawmg lightly at the child But her hands
were steady, and he let her have it And she now sits with
it upon her lap while the doctor who had arrived too late
stands beside the cot, talking m his cheerful, testy voice
while his hands are busy Hightower turns and goes out,
lowering himself carefully down the broken step, to the
earth like an old man, as if there were something in his



354

flabby paunch fatal and highly keyed, like dynamite It is
now more than dawn, it is morning already the sun He
looks about, pausing, he calls “Byron ” There is no answer
Then he sees that the mule, which he had tethered to a
fence post nearby, is also gone He sighs ‘Well/ he thinks
'So I have reached the point wheie the crowning indignity
which I am to suffer at Byron's hands is a two-mile walk
back home That’s not worthy of Byron, of hatred But so
often our deeds are not Nor we of our deeds ’

He walks back to town sowly — a gaunt, paunched man
m a soiled panama hat and the tail of a coarse cotton night-
shirt thrust into his black trousers 'Luckily I did take time
to put on my shoes/ he thinks 1 am bred/ he thinks, fret-
fully T am tired, and I shall not be able to sleep * He is
thinking it fretfully, wearily, keepmg time to his feet when
he tons into his gate The sun is now high, the town has
wakened, he smells the smoke here and there of cooking
breakfasts 'The least thing he could have done/ he thinks,
'since he would not leave me the mule, would have been to
nde ahead and start a fire in my stove for me Since he
thinks it better for my appetite to take a two-mile stroll be-
fore eabng ?

He goes to the kitchen and builds a fire in the stove,
slowly, clumsily, as clumsily after twentyfive years as on
the first day he had ever attempted it, and puts coftee on
Then 111 go back to bed/ he thinks 'But I know I shall
not sleep * But he notices that his thinking sounds queru-
lous, like the peaceful whining of a querulous woman who
is not even listening to herself, then he finds that he is pre-
paring his usual hearty bieakfast, and he stops quite still,
chckmg his tongue as though m displeasure 1 ought to feel
worse than I do/ he thinks But he has to admit that he
does not And as he stands, tall, misshapen, lonely m his
lonely and lllkept kitchen, holding m his hand an iron
skillet in which yesterday s old grease is bleakly caked, there


355

goes through him a glow, a wave, a surge of something
almost hot, almost triumphant 1 showed them!’ he thinks
‘Life comes to the old man yet, while they get there too
late They get there for his leavings, as Byron would say >
But this is vanity and empty pride Yet the slow and fading
glow disiegards it, impervious to reprimand He thinks,
‘What if I do? What if I do feel it? triumph and pride?
What if I do?' But the warmth, the glow, evidently does
not regard or need buttressing either, neither is it quenched
by the actuality of an orange and eggs and toast And he
looks down at the soiled and empty dishes on the table and
he says, aloud now “Bless my soul Ym not even going to
wash them now ” Neither does he go to his bedroom to try
to sleep He goes to the door and looks m, with that glow
of purpose and pride, thinking, If I were a woman, now
Thats what a woman would do go back to bed to rest r
He goes to the study He moves like a man with a purpose
now, who for twentyfive years has been doing nothing at
all between the time to wake and the tune to sleep again
Neither is the book which he now chooses the Tennyson
this time also he chooses food for a man It is Henry TV
and he goes out into the back yard and lies down m the sag-
ging deck chair beneath the mulberry tree, plumping solidly
and heavily into it ‘But I shant be able to sleep/ he thinks,
^because Byron will be m soon to wake me But to learn
just what else he can think of to want me to do, will be
almost worth the waking’

He goes to sleep soon, almost immediately, snonng Any
one pausing to look down into the chair would have seen,
beneath the twin glares of sky m the spectacles, a face in-
nocent, peaceful, and assured But no one comes, though
when he wakes almost six hours later, he seems to believe
that someone has called him He sits up abruptly, the chair
creaking beneath him “Yes?” he says “Yes? What is it?”
But there is no one there, though for a moment longer he



356

looks about, seeming to listen and to wait, with that air
forceful and assured And the glow is not gone either
'Though I had hoped to sleep it off/ he thinks, thinking at
once, 'No I dont mean hoped What is m my thought is
feared And so I have surrendered too/ he thinks, quiet,
still He begins to rub his hands, gently at fiist, a lit lie
guiltily T have surrendered too And I will permit myself
Yes Perhaps this too is reserved for me And so I shall
permit myself’ And then he says it, thinks it That child
that I delivered I have no namesake But I have known
them before this to be named by a grateful mother foi the
doctor who officiated But then, there is Byron Byron of
course will take the pas of me She will have to have
others, more remembering the young strong body from
out whose travail even there shone something tranquil and
unafraid More of them Many more That will be her
life, her destiny The good stock peopling m tranquil obedi-
ence to it the good earth, from these hearty loins without
hurry or haste descending mother and daughter But by
Byron engendered next Poor boy Even though he did let
me walk back home

He enters the house He shaves and removes the night-
shirt and puts on the shirt which he had worn yesterday,
and a collar and the lawn tie and the panama hat The walk
out to tlie cabin does not take him as long as die walk home
did, even though he goes now through the woods where
the walking is harder T must do this more often/ he thinks,
feeling the mtermittent sun, the heat, smelling the savage
and fecund odor of the earth, the woods, the loud silence T
should never have lost this habit, too But perhaps they
will both come back to me, if this itself be not the same
as prayer *

He emerges from the woods at the far side of the pasture
behind the cabm Beyond the cabin he can see the clump of
trees in which the house had stood and burned, though



857

from heie he cannot see the charred and mute embers
of what weie once planks and beams ‘Poor woman/ he
thinks ‘Pool, barren woman To have not lived only a week
longer, until luck returned to this place Under luck and
life returned to these barren and ruined acres * It seems to
him that he can see, feel, about him the ghosts of rich fields,
and of the rich fecund black life of the quai ters, the mellow
shouts, the presence of fecund women, the prolific naked
childien m the dust before the doors, and the big house
again, noisy, loud with the treble shouts of the generations
He reaches the cabin He does not knock, with his hand
already opening the door he calls in a hearty voice that al
most booms “Can the doctor come m?”

The cabin is empty save for the mother and child She
is propped up on the cot, the child at breast As Hightower
enters, she is in the act of drawing the sheet up over her
bared bosom, watching the door not with alarm at all, but
with alertness, her face fixed m an expression serene and
warm, as though she were about to smile He sees this fade.
“I thought — ” she says

“Who did you think?” he says, booms He comes to the
cot and looks down at her, at the tiny, weazened, terracotta
face of the child which seems to hang suspended without
body and still asleep from the breast Again she draws the
sheet closer, modest and tranquil, while above her the
gaunt, paunched, bald man stands with an expression on
his face gentle, beaming, and triumphant She is looking
down at the child

“It looks like he just cant get caught up I think he is
asleep again and I lay him down and then he hollers and
I have to put him back again ”

“You ought not to be heie alone,” he says He looks about
the room “Where — ”

“She's gone, too To town She didn't say, but that's
where she has gone He slipped out, and when she woke



358

up she asked me where he was and I told her he went
out, and she followed him ”

“To town? Slipped out?” Then he says “Oh” quietly
His face is grave now

“She watched him all day And he was watching her I
could tell it He was making out like he was asleep She
thought that he was asleep And so after dinner she gave
out She hadn’t rested any last night, and after dinner she
set in the chair and dozed And he was watching her, and
he got up from the other cot, careful, winking and squrnch-
mg his face at me He went to die door, still winking and
squinting back at me over his shoulder, and tiptoed out
And I never tried to stop him nor wake her, neither ” She
looks at Hightower, her eyes grave, wide “I was scared to
He talks funny And the way he was looking at me Like
all the winking and squmchmg was not for me to not wake
her up, but to tell me what would happen to me if I did
And I was scared to And so I laid here with the baby and
pretty soon she jerked awake And then I knew she hadn't
aimed to go to sleep It was like she come awake already
running to the cot where he had been, touching it like she
couldn't believe he had done got away Because she stood
there at the cot, pawmg at the blanket like maybe she
thought he was mislaid inside the blanket somewhere And
then she looked at me, once And she wasn’t winking and
squinting, but I mgh wished she was And she asked me
and I told her and she put on her hat and went out ” She
looks at Hightower “I’m glad she’s gone I reckon I ought
not to say it, after all she done for me But

Hightower stands over the cot He does not seem to see
her His face is very grave, it is almost as though it had
grown ten years older while he stood there Or like his face
looks now as it should look and that when he entered the
room, it had been a stranger to itself “To town,” he says
Then his eyes wake, seeing agam ‘Well It cant be helped



359

now,” he says "Besides, the men downtown, the sane
there will be a few of them Why are you glad they
are gone?”

She looks down Her hand moves about the baby* s head,
not touching it a gesture instinctive, unneeded, apparently
unconscious of itself "She has been kind More than kind
Holding the baby so I could rest She wants to hold him all
the time, setting there m that chair — You'll have to excuse
me I amt once invited you to set ” She watches him as he
draws the chair up to the cot and sits down " Setting
there where she could watch him on the cot, making out
that he was asleep ” She looks at Hightower, her eyes are
questioning, intent "She keeps on calling him Joey When
his name amt Joey And she keeps on ” She watches
Hightower Her eyes are puzzled now, questioning, doubt-
ful "She keeps on talking about — She is mixed up some-
way And sometimes I get mixed up too, listening, having
to ” Her eyes, her words, grope, fumble

"Mixed up?”

"She keeps on talking about him like his pa was that
the one m jail, that Mr Christmas She keeps on, and then
I get mixed up and its like sometimes I cant — like I am
mixed up too and I think that his pa is that Mr — Mr Christ-
mas too — ” She watches him, it is as though she makes
a tremendous effort of some kind "But I know that amt
so I know that's foolish It's because she keeps on saymg
it and saying it, and maybe I amt strong good yet, and J
get mixed up too But I am afraid

"Of what?”

"I dont hke to get mixed up And I am afraid she might
get me mixed up, hke they say how you might cross your
eyes and then you cant uncross ” She stops looking at
hun She does not move She can feel him watching her

"You say the baby's name is not Joe What is his name?”

For a moment longer she does not look at Hightower



360

Then she looks up She say s, too immediately, too easily
V I amt named him yet ”

And he knows why It is as though he sees her for the
first time since he entered He notices for the first time that
her hair has been recently combed and that she has fieslv
ened her face too, and he sees, half hidden by the sheet, as
if she had thrust them hurriedly there when he entered, a
comb and a shard of broken mirror "When I came m, you
were expecting someone And it was not me Who were you
expecting?”

She does not look away Her face is neither innocent
nor dissimulating Neither is it placid and serene "Expect-
ing?”

"Was it Byron Bunch you expected?” Still she does not
look away Hightower s face is sober, firm, gentle Yet m it
is that ruthlessness which she has seen m the faces of a
few good people, men usually, whom she has known He
leans forward and lays his hand on hers where it supports
the child's body "Byron is a good man,” he says

"I reckon I know that, well as anybody Better than
most ”

"And you are a good woman Will be I dont mean — ”
he says quickly Then he ceases "I didn't mean — ”

"I reckon I know,” she says

"No Not this This does not matter This is not anything
yet It all depends on what you do with it, afterward With
yourself With others ” He looks at her, she does not look
away "Let him go Send him away from you ” They look
at one another "Send him away, daughter You are prob-
ably not much moie than half his age But you have al-
ready outlived him twice over He will never overtake you,
catch up with you, because he has wasted too much tune
And that too, his nothing, is as irremediable as your all He
can no more ever cast back and do, than you can cast back
and undo You have a manchild that is not his a by a man



S81


that is not him You will be forcmg into his life two men
and only the third part of a woman, who deserves at the
least that the nothing with which he has lived for thirty-
five years be violated, if violated it must be, without two
witnesses Send him away ”

"That amt for me to do He is free Ask him I have not
tried once to hold him ”

"That’s it You piobably could not have held him, if you
had tried to That’s it If you had known how to try But
then, if you had known that, you would not be here in this
cot, with this child at your breast And you wont send him
away? You wont say the word?”

"I can say no more than I have said And I said No to
him five days ago ”

“No?”

"He said for me to marry him To not wait And I said
No”

"Would you say No now?”

She looks at him steadily "Yes I would say it now ”

He sighs, huge, shapeless, his face is again slack, weary
"I believe you You will continue to say it until after you
have seen ” He looks at her again, again his gaze is
intent, hard "Where is he? Byron?”

She looks at him After a while she says quietly "I dont
know ” She looks at him, suddenly her face is quite empty,
as though something which gave it actual solidity and firm-
ness were beginning to dram out of it Now there is nothing
of dissimulation nor alertness nor caution in it This morn-
ing about ten o’clock he came back He didn’t come in He
just came to the door and he stood there and he just looked
at me And I hadn’t seen him since last night and he hadn’t
seen the baby and I said, 'Come and see him,’ and he looked
at me, standing there m the door, and he said, 'I come to
find out when you want to see him,’ and I said, 'See who?’
and be said, ‘They mav have to send a deputy with hun



362


but I can persuade Kennedy to let him come/ and I said,
‘Let who come? and he said, "Lucas Burch/ and I said,
"Yes/ and he said, "This evening? Will that do?’ and I
said, "Yes/ and he went away He just stood there, and then
he went away ” While he watches her with that despair of
all men m the presence of female tears, she begins to cry
She sits upright, the child at her breast, crying, not loud
and not hard, but with a patient r «nd hopeless abjectness,
not hiding her face "And you worry me about if I said No
or not and I already said No and you worry me and worry
me and now he is already gone I will nevei see him again *
And he sits there, and she bows her head at last, and he
rises and stands over her with his hand on her bowed head,
thinking Thank God , God help me Tharik God , God help
me

He found Christmas’ old path through the woods to the
mill He did not know that it was there, but when he found
in which direction it ran, it seemed like an omen to him
in his exultation He believes her, but he wants to coriobo-
rate the information for the sheer pleasure of hearing it
again It is just four o’clock when he reaches the mill He
inquires at the office

"Bunch?” the bookkeeper says ""You wont find him here
He quit this morning ”

"1 know, I know/’ Hightower says

""Been with the company for seven years, Saturday eve-
rungs too Then this mornmg he walked m and said he
was quitting No reason But that’s the way these hillbillies
do”

""Yes, yes/ 5 Hightower says ""They are fine people,
though Fine men and women ” He leaves the office The
road to town passes the planer shed, where Byron worked
He knows Mooney, the foreman "T hear Byron Bunch is
not with you any more,” he says, pausing



363

*Yes/' Mooney says "He quit this morning * But High,
tower is not listening, the overalled men watch the shabby,
queershaped, not-qin te-f amiliar figure looking with a kind
of exultant mterest at the walls, the planks, the cryptic ma-
chinery whose very being and purpose he could not have
understood or even learned "If you want to see him ,”
Mooney says, "I reckon you 11 find him downtown at the
courthouse ”

"At the courthouse?”

“Yes, sir Grand Jury meets today Special call To indict
that murderer ”

"Yes, yes,” Hightower says "So he is gone Yes A fine
young man Goodday, goodday, gentlemen Goodday to
you ” He goes on, while the men in overalls look after him
for a time His hands are clasped behind him He paces on,
thinking quietly, peacefully, sadly "Poor man Poor fel-
low No man is, can be, justified in taking human life,
least of all, a warranted officer, a sworn servant of his fel-
lowman When it is sanctioned publicly m the person of
an elected officer who knows that he has not himself suf-
fered at the hands of his victim, call that victim by what
name you will, how can we expect an individual to refrain
when he believes that he has suffered at the hands of hts
victim?’ He walks on, he is now m his own street Soon
he can see his fence, the signboard, then the house beyond
the rich foliage of August ‘So he departed without coming
to tell me goodbye After all he has done for me Fetched
to me Ay, given, restored, to me It would seem that this
too was reserved for me And this must be all ?

But it is not all There is one thing more reserved for
him.



18


WHEN BYRON REACHED TOWN HE FOUND THAT HE COULD NOT

see the sheriff until noon, since the sheriff would be engaged
all morning with the special Grand Jury “You’ll have to
wait/' they told him

"Yes,” Byron said "I know how ”

"Know how what?” But he did not answer He left the
sheriffs office and stood beneath the portico which faced
the south side of the square From the shallow, flagged
terrace the stone columns rose, arching, weathered, stamed
with generations of casual tobacco Beneath them, steady
and constant and with a grave purposelessness (and with
here and there, standing motionless or talking to one an-
other from the sides of their mouths, some youngish men,
townsmen, some of whom Byron knew as clerks and young
lawyers and even merchants, who had a generally identical
authoritative air, like policemen m disguise and not espe-
cially caring if the disguise hid the policeman or not)
countrymen m overalls moved, with almost the air of
monks m a cloister, speaking quietly among themselves of
money and crops, looking quietly now and then upward
at the ceiling beyond which the Grand Jury was preparing
behind locked doors to take the life of a man whom few of
364



365

them had ever seen to know, for havmg taken the life of a
woman whom even fewer of them had known to see The
wagons and the dusty cars in which they had come to town
were ranked about the square, and along the streets and in
and out of the stoies the wives and daughters who had
come to town with them moved m clumps, slowly and also
aimlessly as cattle or clouds Byron stood there for quite a
while, motionless, not leaning against anything — a small
man who had lived m the town seven years yet whom
even fewer of the country people than knew either the mur-
derer or the murdered, knew by name or habit
Byron was not conscious of this He did not care now,
though a week ago it would have been different Then he
would not have stood here, where any man could look
at him and perhaps recogmse him Byron Bunch, that
weeded another mans laidby crop, without any halvers
The fellow that took caie of another mans whore while
the other fellow was busy making a thousand dollars And
got nothing for it Byron Bunch that protected her good
name when the woman that owned the good name and the
man she had given it to had both thrown it away, that got
the other fellow's bastard born m peace and quiet and at
Byron Bunch's expense, and heard a baby cry once for his
pay Got nothing for it except permission to fetch the other
fellow back to her soon as he got done collecting the thou-
sand dollars and Byron wasn't needed any more Byron
Bunch "And now I can go away/ he thought He began to
breathe deep He could feel himself breathing deep, as if
each time his msides were afiaid that next breath they
would not be able to give far enough and that something
terrible would happen, and that all the time he could look
down at himself breathing, at his chest, and see no move-
ment at all, hke when dynamite first begins, gathers itself
for the now Now NOW, the shape of the outside of the
stick does not change, that the people who passed and



see

looked at him could see no change a small man you would
not look at twice, that you would never believe he had
done what he had done and felt what he had felt, who had
believed that out there at the mill on a Saturday afternoon,
alone, the chance to be hurt could not have found him

He was walking among the people 1 got to go some-
where/ he thought He could walk in time to that 1 got
to go somewhere ’ That would get him along He was still
saying it when he reached the boardinghouse His room
faced the street Before he realised that he had begun to
look toward it, he was looking away 'I might see some-
body reading or smoking in the window/ he thought He
entered the hall After die bright morning, he could not
see at once He could smell wet linoleum, soap It’s still
Monday/ he thought 1 had forgot that Maybe it's next
Monday That’s what it seems like it ought to be ' He did
not call After a while he could see better He could hear
the mop in the back of the hall or maybe the kitchen. Then
against the rectangle of light which was the rear door, also
open, he saw Mrs Beard’s head leaning out, then her body m
full silhouette, advancmg up the hall

"Well/’ she said, "it’s Mister Byron Bunch Mister Byron
Bunch ”

"Yessum/’ he said, thinking, 'Only a fat lady that
never had much more trouble than a mopping pail would
hold ought not to try to be ’ Again he could not
think of the word that Hightower would know, would use
without having to think of it Tt’s like I not only cant do
anything without getting him mixed up m it, I cant even
thmk without him to help me out — "Yessum,” he said
And then he stood there, not even able to tell her that he
had come to say goodbye 'Maybe I amt/ he thought T
reckon when a fellow has lived m one room for seven
years, he amt gomg to get moved in one day Only I reckon



367

that amt going to interfere with her renting out his room
— “I reckon I owe you a little room rent/’ he said

She looked at him a hard, comfortable face, not unkind
either “Rent foi what?” she said “I thought you was settled
Decided to tent for the summer * She looked at him Then
she told him She did it gently, delicately, considering “I
done already collected the rent for that room ”

“Oh,” he said “Yes I see Yes ” He looked quietly up the
scoured, Imoleumstripped stairway, scuffed bare by the aid
of his own feet When the new linoleum was put down
three years ago, he had been the first of the boarders to
mount upon it “Oh,” he said “Well, I reckon I better
She answered that too, immediately, not unkind “I
tended to that I put everything you left m your grip It's
back m my room If you want to go up and look for your-
self, though? *

“No I reckon you got every Well, I reckon I
She was watching him “You men,” she said “It amt a
wonder womenfolks get impatient with you You cant even
know your own limits for devilment Which amt more than
I can measure on a pin, at that I reckon if it wasn’t for
getting some woman mixed up m it to help you, you’d ever
one of you be drug hollering into heaven before you was
ten years old ”

“I reckon you amt got any call to say anything against
her,” he said

“No more I amt I dont need to Dont no other woman
need to that is going to I amt saying that it amt been
women that has done most of the talking But if you had
more than mansense you would know that women dont
mean anything when they talk It’s xnenfolks that take talk-
ing serious It amt any woman that believes hard against
you and her Because it amt any woman but knows that
she amt had any reason to have to be bad with you, even



368

discounting that baby Or any other man right now She
never had to Amt you and that preacher and ever other
man that knows about her already done everything for
her that she could think to want? What does she need to
be bad for? Tell me that ”

“Yes,” Byron says He was not looking at hei now “I just
come

She answered that too, before it was spoken “I reckon
youll be leaving us soon ” She was watching him “What
have they done this morning at the courthouse?”

“I don t know They amt finished yet ”

“I bound that, too They’ll take as much time and trouble
and county money as they can cleaning up what us women
could have cleaned up m ten minutes Saturday night For
bemg such a fool Not that Jefferson will miss him Cant get
along without him But bemg fool enough to behave that
killing a woman will do a man any moie good tnan killing
a man would a woman I reckon they’ll let the other
one go, now ”

“Yessum I reckon so ”

“And they believed for a while that he helped do it And
so they will give him that thousand dollars to show it amt
any hard feelings And then they can get married That’s
about right, amt it?”

“Yessum ” He could feel her watching him, not unkindly

“And so I reckon youll be leaving us I reckon you kind
of feel like you have wore out Jefferson, dont you?”

“Something like that I reckon Til move on ”

“Well, Jefferson’s a good town But it amt so good but
what a footloose man like you can find m another one
enough devilment and trouble to keep him occupied too,
* You can leave your grip here until you are ready for
it, if you want ”

He waited until noon and after He waited until he be-
lieved that the sheriff had finished his dinner Then he went



369

to the sheriff's home He would not come m He waited at
the door until the sheriff came out— the fat man, with little
wise eyes like bits of mica embedded m his fat, still face
They went aside, into the shade of a tree in the yard There
was no seat theie, neither did they squat on their heels,
as by oidmary (they were both countxybred) they would
have done The sheriff listened quietly to the man, the quiet
little man who for seven years had been a minor mystery to
the town and who had been for seven days wellmgh a pub-
lic outrage and affront

“I see," the sheriff said “You think the time has come to
get them married "

“I dont know That’s his business and hers I reckon he
better go out and see her, though I reckon now is the time
for that You can send a deputy with him I told her he
would come out there this evening What they do then is
her business and hisn It amt mine *

“Sho,” the sheriff said “It amt youm ’’ He was looking at
the other’s profile “What do you aim to do now, Byron?"

“I dont know" His foot moved slowly upon the earth,
he was watching it “I been thinking about going up to
Memphis Been thinking about it for a couple of years I
might do that There amt nothing m these little towns ’’

“Sho Memphis amt a bad town, for them that like city
life Of course, you amt got any family to have to drag
around and hamper you I reckon if I had been a single
man ten years ago Vd have done that too Been better off,
maybe You’re figuring on leaving right away, I reckon"
“Soon, I reckon" He looked up, then down again He
said “I quit out at the mill this morning "

“Sho the sheriff said “I figured you hadn’t walked all
the way m since twelve and aimed to get back out there
by one o’clock Well, it looks like — " He ceased He knew
that by night the Grand Jury would have indicted Christ-
mas, and Brown — or Burch — would he a free agent save



370

for his bond to appear as a witness at next month's court
But even his presence would not be absolutely essential,
smce Christmas had made no demal and the sheriff be-
lieved that he would plead guilty m order to save his neck
‘And it wont do no harm, anyway, to throw the scare of
God into that dum fellow, once m his life/ he thought He
said “I reckon that can be fixed Of course, like you say, I
will have to send a deputy with him Even if he amt going
to run so long as he has any hope of getting some of that
reward money And provided he dont know what he is go-
ing to meet when he gets there He dont know that yet ”
“No/' Byron said “He dont know that He dont know
that she is m Jefferson *

“So I reckon I'll just send him out there with a deputy
Not tell him why just send him out there Unless you want
to take him yourself ”

“No” Byron said “No No ” But he did not move
Til just do that You’ll be gone by that time, I reckon
111 just send a deputy with him Will four o’clock do?”

“It’ll be fine It’ll be kind of you It’ll be a kindness ”

“Sho Lots of folks beside me has been good to her smce
she come to Jefferson Well, I amt going to say goodbye I
reckon Jefferson will see you again some day Never knowed
a man yet to live here a while and then leave it for good
Except maybe that fellow m the jail yonder But he’11 plead
guilty, I reckon Save his neck Take it out of Jefferson
though, anyway It’s right hard on that old lady that thinks
she is his grandmother The old man was downtown when
I come home, hollering and ranting, calling folks cowards
because they wouldn’t take him out of jail right then and
there and lynt^h him” He began to chuckle, heavily “He
better be careful, or Percy Gnmm’ll get him with that army
of his ” He sobered “It’s right hard on her On women ” He
looked at Byron’s profile, “It’s been right hard on a lot of



371

as Well, you come back some day soon Maybe Jefferson
will treat you better next time ”

At four o'clock that afternoon, hidden, he sees the car
come up and stop, and the deputy and the man whom he
knew by the name of Brown get out and approach the
cabin Brown is not handcuffed now, and Byron watches
them reach the cabin and sees the deputy push Brown for-
ward and into the door Then the door closes behind
Brown, and the deputy sits on the step and takes a sack of
tobacco from his pocket Byron rises to his feet T can go
now/ he thinks ‘Now I can go ’ His hiding place is a clump
of shrubbery on the lawn where the house once stood On
the opposite side of the clump, hidden from the cabin and
the road both, the mule is tethered Lashed behind the
worn saddle is a battered yellow suitcase which is not
leather He mounts the mule and turns it into the road He
does not look back

The mild red road goes on beneath the slanting and
peaceful afternoon, mounting a hill Well, I can bear a hill/
he thinks 1 can bear a hill, a man can" It is peaceful and
still, familiar with seven years Tt seems like a man can just
about bear anything He can even bear what he never done
He can even bear the thinking how some things is just more
than he can bear He can even bear it that if he could just
give down and cry, he wouldn't do it He can even bear it
to not look back, even when he knows that looking back or
not looking back wont do him any good *

The hill rises, cresting He has never seen the sea, and so
he thinks Tt is like the edge of nothing Like once I passed
it I would just ride right off into nothing Where trees would
look like and be called by something else except trees, and
men would look like and be called by something else except
folks And Byron Bunch he wouldn't even have to be or not
be Byron Bunch Byron Bunch and his mule not anything



372

with falling fast, until they would take fire like the Rever-
end Hightower says about them rocks xunning so fast in
space that they take fire and burn up and theie amt even a
cmder to have to hit the ground ’

But then from beyond the hill crest there begins to rise
that which he knows is there the trees which are trees, the
terrific and tedious distance which, being moved by blood,
he must compass forever and ever between two inescapable
horizons of the implacable earth Steadily they rise, not por-
tentous, not threatful That's it They are oblivious of him
‘Dont know and dont care,' he thinks 'Like they were say
mg All right You say you suffer All right But m the -first
place, all we got is your naked word for it And m the
second place , you 'just say that you are Byron Bunch And
m the third place, you are just the one that calls your-
self Byron Bunch today, now, this minute ‘Well/ he
thinks, "if that's all it is, I reckon I might as well have the
pleasure of not being able to bear looking back too 5 He
halts the mul® and turns in the saddle
He did not realise that he has come so far and that the
crest is so high Like a shallow bowl the once broad domain
of what was seventy years ago a plantation house lies be-
neath him, between him and the opposite ridge upon which
is Jefferson But the plantation is broken now by random
Negro cabins and garden patches and dead fields erosion
gutted and choked with blackjack and sassafras and per-
simmon and brier But m the exact center the clump of
oaks still stand as they stood when the house was built,
though now there is no house among them From here he
cannot even see the scars of the fire, he could not even tell
where it used to stand if it were not for the oaks and
the position of the rumed stable and the cabin beyond, the
cabin toward which he is lookmg It stands full and quiet
in the afternoon sun, almost toyhke, like a toy the deputy



YiZ

sits on the step Then, as Byron matches, a man appears as
though by magic at the rear of it, aheady running, in the
act of running out from the rear of the cabin while the un-
suspecting deputy sits qmet and motionless on the front
step Foi a while longei Bjion too sits motionless, half-
turned m the saddle, and watches the tiny figure flee on
across the barien slope behind the cabin, toward the w'oods
Then a cold, haid wind seems to blow through him It
is at once violent and peaceful, blowing hard away like
chaff or liash or dead leaves all the desire and the despair
and the hopelessness and the tragic and vam imagining too
With the veiy blast of it he seems to feel himself rush back
and empty again, without anything m him now which had
not been theie two weeks ago, before he ever saw her The
desire of this moment is more than desire it is conviction
quiet and assured, before he is aware that his bram has tele-
graphed his hand he has turned the mule from the road
and is galloping along the ndge which parallels the run-
ning man s course when he entered the woods He has not
even named the man s name to himself He does not specu-
late at all upon where the man is going, and why It does
not once enter his head that Brown is fleeing again, as he
himself had predicted If he thought about it at all, he
probably believed that Brown was engaged, after his own
peculiar fashion, in some thoroughly legitimate business hav-
ing to do with his and Lena's departure But he was not
thinking about that at all, he was not thinking about Lena
at all, she was as completely out of his mind as if he had
never seen her face nor heard her name He is thinking 1
took care of his woman for him and I homed his child for
him And now there is one more tiling I can do for him I
cant marry them, because I amt a minister And I may not
can catch him, because he's got a start on me And I may
not can whip him if I do, because he is bigger than me But
I can try it I can try to do it ’



374

When the deputy called for him at the jail, Brown asked
at once where they were going Visiting, the deputy told
him Brown held back, watching the deputy with his hand-
some, spuriously bold face “I dont want to visit nobody
here I’m a stranger here ”

“You d be strange anywhere you was at,” the deputy said
“Even at home Come on ”

Tm a American citizen,” Brown said “I reckon I got my
rights, even if I dont wear no tm star on my galluses ”

“Sho,” the deputy said “That’s what I am doing now
helping you get your rights ”

Brown’s face lighted it was a flash “Have they — Are
they gomg to pay — ”

“That reward? Sho I’m going to take you to the place
myself right now, where if you are gomg to get any reward,
you’ll get it ”

Brown sobered But he moved, though he still watched
the deputy suspiciously “This here is a funny way to go
about it,” he said “Keeping me shut up in jail while them
bastards tries to beat me out of it ”

“I reckon the bastard amt been whelped yet that can
beat you at anything,” the deputy said “Come on They re
waiting on us ”

They emerged from the jail In the sunlight Brown
blinked, looking this way and that, then he jerked his
head up, looking back over his shoulder with that horselike
movement The car was waiting at the curb Brown looked
at the car and then at the deputy, quite sober, quite wary
“Where are we gomg m a car?” he said “It wasn’t too far
for me to walk to the courthouse this morning ”

“Watt sent the car to help bring back the reward in,” the
deputy said “Get m ”

Brown grunted “He’s done got mighty particular about
my comfort all of a sudden A car to ride an, and no hand-



375

cuffs And just one dum fellow to keep me from running
away ”

“l amt keeping you from running,” the deputy said He
paused in the act of starting the car cc You want to run
now?”

Brown looked at him, glaring, sullen, outraged, suspi-
cious T see,” he said ‘That’s his trick Trick me into run-
ning and then collect that thousand dollars himself How
much of it did he promise you?”

“Me? I’m gomg to get the same as you, to a cent”

For a moment longer Brown glared at the deputy He
cursed, pointless, m a weak, violent way “Come on,” he
said “Let’s go if we are going ”

They drove out to the scene of the fire and the murder*
At steady, almost tuned intervals Brown jerked his head
up and back with that movement of a free mule running m
front of a car in a narrow road “What are we gomg out
here for?”

“To get your reward,” the deputy said
'Where am I gomg to get it?”

“In that cabin yonder It’s waitmg for you there ”

Brown looked about, at the blackened embers which had
once been a house, at the blank cabin m which he had lived
for four months sitting weathered and quiet m the sunlight
His face was quite grave, quite alert 'There’s something
funny about this If Kennedy thinks he can tromple on my
rights, just because he wears a dum little tin star

“Get on,” the deputy said “If you dont like the reward.
Til be waitmg to take you back to jail any time you want
Just any time you want” He pushed Brown on, opening
the cabm door and pushing him into it and closing the door
behmd him and sitting on the step

Brown heard the door close behmd him He was stdl
moving forward Then, m the midst of one of those quick,
jerking, allembracmg looks, as if his eyes could not wait



376

to take m the room, he stopped dead still Lena on the cot
watched the white scar beside his mouth vanish completely,
as if the ebb of blood behind it had snatched the scar m
passing like a rag from a clothesline She did not speak at
all She just lay there, propped on the pillows, watchmg
him with her sober eyes m which there was nothing at all
— joy, surprise, reproach, love — while over his face passed
shock, astomshment, outrage, and then downright terror,
each one mocking m turn at the telltale little white scar,
while ceaselessly here and there about the empty room went
Ins harried and desperate eyes She watched him herd
them by will, like two terrified beasts, and drive them up to
meet her own "Well, well,” he said "Well, well, well It's
Lena ” She watched him, holding his eyes up to hers like
two beasts about to break, as if he knew that when they
broke this time he would never catch them, turn them
again, and that he himself would be lost She could almost
watch his mind casting this way and that, ceaseless, harried,
terrified, seeking words which his voice, his tongue, could
speak "If it amt Lena Yes, sir So you got my message Soon
as I got here I sent you a message last month as soon as I
got settled down and I thought it had got lost — It was a
fellow I didnt know what his name was but he said he
would take — He didn’t look lehable but I had to trust him
but I thought when I gave him the ten dollars for you
to travel on that he ” His voice died somewhere be-
hind his desperate eyes Yet stdl she could watch his mind
darting and darting as without pity, without anything at
all, she watched him with her grave, unwinking, unbearable
gaze, watched him fumble and flee and tack until at last
all that remamed in him of pnde, of what sorry pride the
desire for justification was, fled from him and left him
naked Then for the first time she spoke Her voice was
quiet, unruffled, cool

"Come over here,” she said "Come on I axnt going to let



377

him bite you ” When he moved he approached on tiptoe
She saw that, though she was now no longer watching him
She knew that just as she knew that he was now standing
with a kind of clumsy and diffident awe above her and die
sleeping child But she knew that it was not at and because
of the child She knew that m that sense he had not even
seen the child She could still see, feel, his mind darting and
darting He is going to make out like he was not afraid she
thought He will have no more shame than to he about be -
mg afraid , 'just as he had no more shame than to be afraid
because he lied

"Well, well/’ he said "So there it is, sho enough ”

"Yes,” she said "Will you set down?” The chair which
Hightower had drawn up was still beside the cot He
had already remarked it She had it all ready for me he
thought Again he cursed, soundless, badgered, furious
Them bastards Them bastards But his face was quite
smooth when he sat down

"Yes, sir Here we are again Same as I had planned it I
would have had it all fixed up ready for you, only I have
been so busy lately Which reminds me — ” Again he made
that abrupt, mulelike, backlookmg movement of the head
She was not looking at him She said

"There is a preacher here That has already come to see
me ”

"That’ s fine/’ he said His voice was loud, hearty Yet the
heartiness, like the timbre, seemed to be as impermanent
as the sound of the words, vanishing, leaving nothing, not
even a definitely stated thought in the ear or the belief
"That’s just fine Soon as I get caught up with all this busi-
ness— ’ He jerked his arm m a gesture vague, embracing,
looking at her His face was smooth and blank His eyes
were bland, alert, secret, yet behind them there lurked still
that quality harried and desperate But she was not looking
at him



378

“What kind of work are you doing now? At the planing

trail?”

He watched her “No I quit that ” His eyes watched her
It was as though they were not his eyes, had no relation to
the rest of him, what he did and what he said “Slaving like
a dum nigger ten hours a day I got something on the string
now that means money Not no little piddling fifteen cents
a hour And when I get it, soon as I get a few little details
cleared up, then you and me will * Hard, intent, secret,
the eyes watched her, her lowered face in profile Again she
heard that faint, abrupt sound as he jerked his head up and
back “And that reminds me — ”

She had not moved She said <# When will it be, Lucas?”
Then she could hear, feel, utter stillness, utter silence
“When will what he?”

“You know Like you said Back home It was all right
for just me I never minded But it’s different now I reckon
t got a right to worry now ”

“Oh, that,” he said “That Dont you worry about that
Just let me get this here business cleaned up and get my
hands on that money It s mine by right There cant nere a
bastard one of them — ” He stopped His voice had begun
to rise, as though he had forgot where he was and had been
thinking aloud He lowered it, he said “You just leave it to
me Dont you worry none I amt never give you no reason
yet to worry, have P Tell me that ”

“No I never worried I knowed I could depend on you n
“Sho you knowed it And these here bastards — these
here — ” He had risen from the chair “Which reminds me — ”
She neither looked up nor spoke while he stood above her
with those eyes harried, desperate, and importunate It
was as if she held him there and that she knew it And that
she released him by her own will, deliberately
“I reckon you are right busy now, then ”

“For a fact, I am With all I got to bother me, and them



S79

bastards — ” She was looking at him now She watched him
as he looked at the window in the rear wall Then he looked
back at the closed door behind him Then he looked at her,
at her grave face which had either nothing m it, or every-
thing, all knowledge He lowered his voice “I got enemies
here Folks that dont want me to get what I done earned
So I am going to — ” Again it was as though she held him,
forcing him to, trying him with, that final he at which even
his sorry diegs of pride revolted, held him neither with rods
nor cords but with something against which his lying blew
trivial as leaves or trash But she said nothing at all She
just watched him as he went on tiptoe to the window and
opened it without a sound Then he looked at her Perhaps
he thought that he was safe then, that he could get out the
window before she could touch him with a physical hand
Or perhaps it was some sorry tagend of shame, as a while
ago it had been pride Because he looked at her, stripped
naked for the instant of verbiage and deceit His voice was
not much loudei than a whisper “Its a man outside In
front, waiting for me ” Then he was gone, through the win-
dow, without a sound, m a single motion almost like a long
snake From beyond the window she heard a single faint
sound as he began to run Then only did she move, and
then but to sigh once, profoundly

“Now I got to get up again” she said, aloud

When Brown emerges from the woods, onto the railroad
right-of-way, he is pantmg It is not with fatigue, though
the distance which he has covered m the last twenty min-
utes is almost two mjlSs and the going was not smooth.
Bather, it is the snarling and malevolent breathing of a
fleeing animal while he stands looking both ways along the
empty track his face, his expression, is that of an animal
fleeing alone, desiring no fellowaid, clinging to its solitary
dependence upon its own muscles alone and which, in the



380

pause to renew breath, hates every tree and grassblade in
sight as if it were a live enemy, hates the very earth it rests
upon and the very air it needs to renew breathing

He has struck the railroad within a few hundred yards of
the point at which he aimed This is the ciest of a grade
where the northbound freights slow to a terrific and crawl-
ing gait of almost less than that of a walking man A short
distance ahead of him the twin bright threads appear to
have been cut short off as though with scissors
For a while he stands just within the screen of woods be-
side the right-of-way, still hidden He stands like a man m
brooding and desperate calculation, as if he sought m his
mind for some last desperate cast m a game already lost
After standing for a moment longer m an attitude of listen-
ing, he turns and runs again, through the woods and paral-
leling the track lie seems to know exactly where he is go-
ing, he comes presently upon a path and follows it, still
running, and emerges into a clearing m which a Negro cabin
sits He approaches the front, walking now On the porch
an old Negio woman is sitting, smoking a pipe, her head
Wrapped m a white cloth Brown is not running, but he is
breathing fast, heavily He quiets it to speak “Hi, Aunty,"
he says, “who’s here?”

The old Negress removes the pipe “Ise here Who wanter
blow?”

“I got to send a message back to town In a hurry ” He
holds his breathing down to talk “111 pay Amt there some-
body here that can take it?”

“If it’s all that rush, you better tend to it yourself ”

“111 pay, I tell you!” He says He speaks with a kind of
Raging patience, holding his voice, his breathing down “A
dollar, if he just goes quick enough Amt there somebody
here that wants to make a dollar? Some of the boys?”

The old woman smokes, watching him With an aged an
inscrutable midnight face she seems to contemplate him



381

with a detachment almost godlike but not at all benign
"A dollai cash?”

He makes a gesture indescribable, of hurry and leashed
rage and something like despair He is about to turn away
when the Negress speaks agam “Amt nobody here but me
and the two little uns I reckon they’d be too little for you *
Brown turns back ‘How little? I just want somebody that
can take a note to the sheriff m a hurry and — ”

“The sheriff? Then you come to the wrong place I amt
ghy have none of mine monkeying around no sheriff I
done had one nigger that thought he knowed a sheriff well
enough to go and visit with him He amt never come back,
neither You look somewhere else ”

But Brown is already moving away He does not run at
once He has not yet thought about running again, for the
moment he cannot think at all His rage and impotence are
now almost ecstatic He seems to muse now upon a sort of
timeless and beautiful infallibility m his unpredictable frus-
trations As though somehow the very fact that he should
be so consistently supplied with them elevates him some-
how above the petty human hopes and desires which they
abrogate and negative Hence the Negress has to shout
twice at him before he hears and turns She has said noth-
ing , she has not moved she merely shouted She says,
“Here one will take it for you *

Standing beside the porch now, materialised apparently
from thm air, is a Negro who may be either a grown imbe*
cile or a hulking youth His face is black, still, also quite
inscrutable They stand looking at one another Or rather.
Brown looks at the Negro He cannot tell if the Negro is
looking at him or not And that too seems somehow right
and fine and m keeping that his final hope and resort
should be a beast that does not appear to have enough
ratiocmative power to find the town, let alone any given
individual m it Agam Brown makes an indescribable ges-



382

ture He is almost running now, back toward the porch,
pawing at his shirt pocket "I want you to take a note to
town and bring me back an answer,” he says “Can you do
it?” But he does not listen for a reply He has taken from
his shirt a scrap of soiled paper and a chewed pencil stub,
and bending over the edge of the porch, he writes, labori-
ous and hurried, while the Negress watches him

Mr Wat Kenedy Dear sir please give barer My re-
ward Money for captain Murder Xmas rapp it up
tn Paper 4 given it toe barer yrs truly

He does not sign it He snatches it up, glaring at it, while
the Negress watches him He glares at the dingy and inno-
cent paper, at the labored and hurried pencilling m which
he had succeeded for an instant m snaring his whole soul
and life too Then he claps it down and writes not Smed
but All ngt You no who and folds it and gives it to the
Negro “Take it to the sheriff Not to nobody else You
reckon you can find him?”

“If the sheriff dont find him first,” the old Negress says
“Give it to him Hell find lmn, if he is above ground Git
your dollar and go on, boy "

The Negro had started away He stops He just stands
there, saying nothing, looking at nothing On the porch
the Negress sits, smoking, looking down at the white man’s
weak, wolflike face a face handsome, plausible, but drawn
now by a fatigue more than physical, into a spent and vul-
pine mask “I thought you was m a hurry,” she says

“Yes,” Brown says He takes a com from his pocket “Here
And if you bung me back the answer to that inside of an
hour. Til give you five more like it ”

“Git on, nigger,” the woman says 'You amt got all day
You want the answer brought back here?”

For a moment longer Brown looks at her Then again



383

caution, shame, all flees from him "No Not here Bring it
to the top of the grade yonder Walk up the track until I
call to you I’ll be watching you all the tune too Dont you
forget that Do you hear?”

"You neednt to worry,” the Negress says "Hell git there
with it and git back with the answer, if dont nothing stop
him Git on, boy ”

The Negro goes on But something does stop him, before
he has gone a half mile It is another white man, leading a
mule

"Where?” Byion says "Where did you see him?”

"Just now Up yon at de house ” The white man goes on,
leading the mule The Negro looks after him He did not
show the white man the note because the white man did
not ask to see it Perhaps the reason the white man did not
ask to see the note was that the white man did not know
that he had a note, perhaps the Negro is thinking this, be-
cause for a while his face mirrors something terrific and sub-
terraneous Then it clears He shouts The white man turns,
halting "He amt dar now,” the Negro shouts "He say he
gwme up ter de railroad grade to wait ”

"Much obliged ” the white man says The Negro goes on

Brown returned to the track He was not running now,
He was saymg to himself, "He wont do it He cant do it I
know he cant find him, cant get it, bring it back 5 He called
no names, thought no names It seemed to him now that
they were all just shapes like chessmen — the Negro, the
sheriff, the money, all — unpredictable and without reason
moved here and there by an Opponent who could read his
moves before he made them and who created spontaneous
rules which he and not the Opponent, must follow He was
for the tune being even beyond despair as he turned from
the rails and entered the underbrush near the crest of the
grade He moved now without haste, gauging his distance



384

as though there were nothing else m the world or in his life
at least, save that He chose Ins place and sat down, hidden
from the track but where he himself could see it

‘Only I know he wont do it/ he thinks 1 dont even ex-
pect it If I was to see him coming back with the money
m his hand, I would not believe it It wouldn't be for me
I would know that I would know that it was a mistake
I would say to him You go on You are looking for some-
body else beside me You amt looking for Lucas Burch No ,
sir, Lucas Burch dont deserve that money , that reward He
never done nothing to get it No, sir He begins to laugh,
squatting, motionless, his spent face bent, laughing *Yes v
six All Lucas Burch wanted was justice Just justice Not
that he told them bastards the murderer s name and where
to find him only they wouldn't try They never tried because
they would have had to give Lucas Burch the money Jus
face 5 Then he says aloud, m a harsh, tearful voice "Justice
That was all Just my rights And them bastards with their
little fan stars, all sworn every one of them on oath, to pro-
tect a American citizen ” He says it harshly, almost crying
with rage and despair and fatigue "I be dog if it amt
enough to make a man turn downright bowlsheyvick ”
Thus he hears no sound at all until Byron speaks directly
behind him

"Get up onto your feet "

It does not last long Byron knew that it was not go-
ing to But he did not hesitate He just crept up until he
could see the other, where he stopped, looking at the
crouching and unwarned figure ‘You're bigger than me/
Byron thought ‘But I dont care You've had every other ad-
vantage of me And I dont care about that neither You've
done throwed away twice inside of nine months what I amt
had in thirtyfive years And now Im going to get the hell
beat out of me and I dont care about that, neither '

It does not last long Brown, whirling, takes advantage


385


of his astonishment even He did not believe that any man,
catching his enemy sitting, would give him a chance to get
on his feet, even if the enemy were not the larger of the two
He would not have done it himself And the fact that the
smaller man did do it when he would not have, was worse
than insult it was lidicule So he fought with even a more
savage fury than he would have if Byron had sprung upon
his back without warning with the blind and desperate
valor of a starved and cornered rat he fought
It lasted less than two minutes Then Byron was ly-
ing quietly among the broken and trampled undergrowth,
bleeding quietly about the face, hearing the underbrush
crashing on, ceasing, fading into silence Then he is alone
He feels no particular pam now, but better than that, he
feels no haste, no urgency, to do anything or go anywhere
He just lies bleeding and quiet, knowing that after a while
will be time enough to re-enter the world and time

He does not even wonder where Brown has gone He
does not have to think about Brown now Again his mind
is filled with still shapes like discarded and fragmentary
toys of childhood piled indiscriminate and gathering quiet
dust in a forgotten closet — Brown Lena Grove Hightower
Byron Bunch — all like small objects which had never been
ahve, which he had played with m childhood and then
broken and forgot He is lying so when he hears the tram
whistle for a crossing a half mile away

This rouses him, this is the world and time too He sits
up, slowly, tentatively "Anyway, I amt broke anything," he
thinks 1 mean, he amt broke anything that belongs to me *
It is getting late it is time now, with distance, moving, m
it *Yes 111 have to be moving 111 have to get on so I can
find me something else to meddle with 9 The tram is coming
nearer Already the stroke of the engine has shortened and
become heavier as it begins to feel the grade, presently he
can see the smoke He seeks xn his pocket for a handker-



386

chief He has none, so he tears the tail from his shirt and
dabs at his face gingerly, listening to the short, blasting re-
ports of the locomotive exhaust just over the grade He
moves to the edge of the undergrowth, where he can see
the track The engine is m sight now, almost headon to him
beneath the spaced, heavy blasts of black smoke It has an
effect of teirific nomotion Yet it does move, creeping terrifi-
cally up and over the crest of the grade Standing now m
the fringe of bushes he watches the engine approach and
pass him, laboring, crawling, with the rapt and boylike ab-
sorption (and perhaps yearning) of his countiy raising It
passes, his eye moves on, watching the cars as they m turn
crawl up and over the crest, when for the second time that
afternoon he sees a man materialise apparently out of air,
m the act of running

Even then he does not realize what Biown is about He
has progressed too far into peace and solitude to wonder
He just stands there and watches Brown run to the tram,
stooping, fleeing, and grasp the iron ladder at the end of
a car and leap upwaid and vanish from sight as though
sucked into a vacuum The tram is beginning to mcrease
its speed, he watches the approach of the car where Brown
vanished It passes, clmgmg to the rear of it, between it and
the next car, Brown stands, his face leaned out and watch-
ing the bushes They see one another at the same moment
the two faces, the mild, nondescript, bloody one and the
lean, harried, desperate one contorted now m a soundless
shouting above the noise of the tram, passmg one another
as though on opposite orbits and with an effect as of phan-
toms or apparitions Still Byron is not thinking “Great God
m the mountain/' he says, with childlike and almost ecstatic
astonishment, “he sho knows how to jump a tram He's sho
done that before w He is not thmkmg at all It is as though
the moving wall of dmgy cars were a dyke beyond which
the world, time, hope unbelievable and certainty mcontro-



387

vertible, waited, giving him yet a little more of peace Any-,
way, when the last car passes, moving fast now, the world
rushes down on him like a flood, a tidal wave

It is too huge and fast for distance and time, hence no
path to be 1 ©traced, leading the mule for a good way be-
fore he remembers to get on it and ride It is as though he
has already and long since outstripped himself, already
waiting at the cabin until he can catch up and enter And
then I will stand there and I will * He tries it again
Then 1 will stand there and I will But he can get no
further than that He is m the road again now, approaching
a wagon homeward bound from town It is about six o'clock
He does not give up, however Even if 1 cant seem to get
any further than that when I will open the door and come
tn and stand there And then 1 will Look at her Look at
her Look ax her — The voice speaks agam
“ — excitement, I reckon ”

“What?” Byron says The wagon has halted He is right
beside it, the mule stopped too On the wagon seat the man
speaks agam, in his flat, complaining voice
“Dura the luck, Just when I had to get started for home
I’m already late ”

“Excitement?” Byron says “What excitement?”

The man is looking at him “From your face, a man would
say you had been m some excitement yourself ”

“I fell down,” Byron says “What excitement m town this
evening?”

“I thought maybe you hadn't heard About an hour ago*
That nigger, Christmas They killed him ”



19


ABOUT THE SUFFERTABLES ON THAT MONDAY NIGHT, WHAT

the town wondered was not so much how Christmas had
escaped but why when free, he had taken refuge m the
place which he did, where he must have known he would
be certainly run to earth, and why when that occurred he
neither surrendered nor resisted It was as though he had
set out and made his plans to passively commit suicide

There were many reasons, opinions, as to why he had
fled to Hightower s house at the last "Like to like,” the easy,
the immediate, ones said, remembering the old tales about
the minister Some believed it to have been sheer chance,
others said that the man had shown wisdom, since he would
not have been suspected of being in the minister s house at
all if someone had not seen him run across the back yard
and run into the kitchen

Gavin Stevens though had a different theory He is the
District Attorney, a Harvard graduate, a Phi Beta Kappa a
tall, loosejomted man with a constant cob pipe, with an un-
tidy mop of rrongray hair, wearing always loose and un-
pressed dark gray clothes His family is old m Jefferson, his
ancestors owned slaves there and his grandfather knew
(and also hated, and publicly congratulated Colonel Sartoris
388



889

when they died) Miss Burden’s grandfather and brother
He has an easy quiet way with country people, with the
voters and the juries, he can be seen now and then squat-
ting among the overalls on the porches of country stores
for a whole summer afternoon, talking to them m their own
idiom about nothing at all

On this Monday night there descended from the nin e
o’clock southbound tram a college professor from the neigh-
boring State University, a schoolmate of Stevens’ at Har-
vard, come to spend a few days of the vacation with his
fnend When he descended from the tram he saw his fnend
at once He believed that Stevens had come down to meet
him until he saw that Stevens was engaged with a queer-
looking old couple whom he was putting on the tram
Looking at them, the professor saw a little, dirty old man
with a short goat’s beard who seemed to be m a state like
catalepsy, and an old woman who must have been his wife
— a dumpy creature with a face like dough beneath a nod-
ding and soiled white plume, shapeless m a silk dress of an
outmoded shape and m color regal and moribund For an
instant the professor paused m a sort of astonished interest,
watching Stevens putting into the woman’s hand, as into
the hand of a child, two railroad tickets, moving again and
approaching and still unseen by his friend, he overheard
Stevens’ final words as the flagman helped the old people
into the vestibule “Yes, yes,” Stevens was saying, m a tone
soothing and recapitulant, ‘Tie’ll be on the tram tomorrow
morning I’ll see to it All you’ll have to do is to arrange
for the funeral, the cemetery You take Granddad on home
and put him to bed 111 see that the boy is on the train m the
mornmg ”

Then the tram began to move and Stevens turned and
saw the professor He began the story as they rode to town
and finished it as they sat on the veranda of Stevens’ home,
and there recapitulated “I think I know why it was, why



390

he ran into Hightower s house for refuge at the last I think
it was his grandmother She had just been with him m his
cell when they took him back to the courthouse again, she
and the grandfather — that little crazed old man who wanted
to lynch him, who came up here from Mottstown for that
purpose I dont think that the old lady had any hope of
saving him when she came, any actual hope I believe that
all she wanted was that he die 'decent/ as she put it De-
cently hung by a Force, a principle, not burned or hacked or
dragged dead by a Thing I think she came here just to
watch that old man, lest he be the straw that started the
hurricane, because she did not dare let him out of her sight
Not that she doubted that Christmas was her grandchild
you understand She just didn’t hope Didn’t know how to
begm to hope I imagine that after thirty years the machin-
ery for hoping requires more than twentyfour hours to get
started, to get into motion again

"But I believe that, having got started physically by the
tide of the old man’s insanity and conviction, before she
knew it she had been swept away too So they came here
They got here on the early tram, about three o’clock Sun-
day morning She made no attempt to see Christmas Per-
haps she was watching the old man But I dont think so I
dont think that the hoping machine had got started then,
either I dont think that it ever did start until that baby was
bom out there this morning, bom right m her face, you
might say, a boy too And she had never seen the mother
before, and the father at all, and that grandson whom she
had never seen as a man, so to her those thirty years just
were not Obhterated when that child cried No longer
existed

"It was all coming down on her too fast There was too
much reality that her hands and eyes could not deny, and
too much that must be taken for granted that her hands



391

and eyes could not prove, too much of the inexplicable
that hands and eyes were asked too suddenly to accept and
believe without proof After the thirty years it must have
been like a person in solitary blundering suddenly into a
room full of strange people all talking at once and she
casting desperately about for anything that would hold
sanity together by choosing some logical course of action
which would be within her limitations, which she could
have some assurance of being able to perform Until that
baby was bom and she found some means by which she
could stand alone, as it were, she had been like an effigy
with a mechanical voice bemg hauled about on a cart by
that fellow Bunch and made to speak when he gave the
signal, as when he took her last mght to tell her story to
Doctor Hightower

“And she was still groping, you see She was still trying
to find something which that mmd which had apparently
not run very much in thirty years, could believe m, admit
to be actual, real And I think that she found it there, at
Hightower’s, for the first time someone to whom she could
tell it, who would listen to her Very likely that was the
first time she had ever told it And very likely she learned
it herself then for the first time, actually saw it whole and
real at the same time with Hightower So I dont think it
is so strange that for the time she got not only the child
but his parentage as well mixed up, since m that cabin those
thirty years did not exist — the child and its father whom
she had never seen, and her grandson whom she had not
seen since he was a baby like the other, and whose father
likewise to her had never existed, all confused And that,
when hope did begin to move in her, she should have
turned at once, with that sublime and boundless faith of
her land m those who are the voluntary slaves and the
sworn bondsmen of prayer, to the minister



392

“That’s what she was telling Christmas m the jail today,
when the old man, watching his chance, had slipped away
from her and she followed him to town and found him on
the street corner again, mad as a hatter and completely
hoarse, preaching lynching, telling the people how he had
grandfathered the devils spawn and had kept it m trust for
this day Or perhaps she was on her way to see him m the
jail when she left the cabin Anyway she left the old man
alone as soon as she saw that his audience was more in-
terested than moved, and went on to the sheriff He had
just got back fiom dinner and for a while he could not
understand what she wanted She must have sounded quite
crazy to him, with that story of hers, m that hopelessly re-
spectable Sunday dress, planning a jailbreak But he let her
go to the jail, with a deputy And there, in the cell with
him, I believe she told him about Hightower, that High-
tower could save him, was going to save him

“But of course I dont know what she told him I dont
believe that any man could reconstruct that scene I dont
think that she knew herself, planned at all what she would
say, because it had already been written and worded for
her on the night when she bore his mothei, and that was
now so long ago that she had learned it beyond all forget-
ting and then forgot the words Perhaps that’s why he be-
lieved her at once, without question I mean, because she
did not worry about what to say, about plausibility or the
possibdity of incredulity on his part that somewhere, some-
how, in the shape or presence or whatever of that old out-
cast minister was a sanctuary which would be inviolable
not only to oflBceis and mobs, but to the very irrevocable
past, to whatever crimes had molded and shaped him and
left him at last high and dry m a barred cell with the shape
of an incipient executioner everywhere he looked

“And he believed her I think that is what gave him not



393

the courage so much as the passive patience to endure and
recognise and accept the one opportunity which he had to
break m the middle of that crowded square, manacled, and
run But there was too much runnmg with him, stride fox'
stride with him Not pursuers but himself years, aets f
deeds omitted and committed, keeping pace with him, stride
for stride, breath for breath, thud for thud of the heart,
using a single heart It was not alone all those thirty years
which she did not know, but all those successions of thirty
years before that which had put that stam either on his
white blood or his black blood, whichever you will, and
which killed him But he must have run with believing for
a while, anyway, with hope But his blood would not be
quiet, let him save it It would not be either one or the
other and let his body save itself Because the black blood
drove him first to the Negro cabin And then the white
blood drove him out of there, as it was the black blood
which snatched up the pistol and the white blood which
would not let him fire it And it was the white blood which
sent him to the minister, which rising in him for the last
and final time, sent him against all reason and all reality,
into the embrace of a chimera, a blind faith m something
read m a printed Book Then I believe that the white blood
deserted him for the moment Just a second, a flicker, allow-
ing the black to rise in its final moment and make him
turn upon that on which he had postulated his hope of sal-
vation It was the black blood which swept him by his own
desire beyond the aid of any man, swept him up into that
ecstasy out of a black jungle where life has already ceased
before the heart stops and death is desire and fulfillment
And then the black blood failed him again, as it must have
in crises all his life He did not kill the minister He merely
struck him with the pistol and ran on and crouched behind
that table and defied the black blood for the last time, as he



894

tad been defying it for thirty years He ciouched behind
that overturned table and let them shoot him to death, with
that loaded and unfired pistol m his hand ”

In the town on that day lived a young man named Percy
Grimm He was about twentyfive and a captain m the State
national guard He had been bom m the town and had
lived there all his life save for the periods of the summer
encampments He was too young to have been m the
European War, though it was not until 1921 or ’22 that he
realised that he would never forgive his parents for that
fact His father, a hardware merchant, did not understand
this He thought that the boy was ]ust lazy and m a fair
way to become perfectly worthless, when m reality the boy
was suffering the terrible tragedy of having been bom not
alone too late but not late enough to have escaped first
hand knowledge of the lost time when he should have been
a man instead of a child And now, with the hysteria passed
away and the ones who had been loudest m the hysteria and
even the ones, the heroes who had suffered and served, be-
ginning to look at one another a little askance, he had no
one to tell it, to open his heart to In fact, his first serious
fight was with an exsoldier who made some remark to the
effect that if he had to do it again, he would fight this time
on the German side and against France At once Grimm
took him up “Against America too?” he said

“If America’s fool enough to help France out again/"
the soldier said Grimm struck him at once, he was smaller
than the soldier, still m his teens The result was foregone,
even Grimm doubtless knew that But he took his punish-
ment until even the soldier begged the bystanders to hold
the boy back And he wore the scars of that battle as
proudly as he was later to wear the uniform itself for which
he had blindly fought

It was the new civilian-military act which saved him



395

He was like a man who had been for a long time m a
swamp, m the dark It was as though he not only could
see no path ahead of him, he knew that there was none
Then suddenly his life opened definite and clear The
wasted years m which he had shown no ability in school, in
which he had been known as lazy, recalcitrant, without
ambition, were behind him, forgotten He could now see
his life opening before him, uncomplex and inescapable as a
barren corridor, completely freed now of ever again having
to think or decide, the burden which he now assumed and
carried as bright and weightless and martial as his m
signatory brass a sublime and implicit faith m physical
courage and blind obedience, and a belief that the white
race is superior to any and all other races and that the
American is superior to all other white races and that the
American unifoim is superior to all men, and that all that
would ever be required of him m payment for this belief,
this privilege, would be his own life On each national holi-
day that had any martial flavor whatever he dressed in his
captain s uniform and came downtown And those who
saw him remembered him again on the day of the fight with
the exsoldier as, glittering, with his marksmans badge (he
was a fine shot) and his bars, grave, erect, he walked among
the civilians with about bim an air half belligerent and
half the selfconscious pride of a boy

He was not a member of the American Legion, but that
was his parents’ fault and not his But when Christmas was
fetched back from Mottstown on that Saturday afternoon,
he had already been to the commander of the local Post
His idea, his words, were quite simple and direct “We got
to preserve order/’ he said, “We must let the Jaw take its
course The law, the nation It is the right of no civilian to
sentence a man to death And we, the soldiers m Jefferson*
are the ones to see to that *

“How do you know that anybody is planning anything



396

different?” the legion commander said "Have you heard
any talk?”

W I dont know I haven’t listened” He didn’t he It was
as though he did not attach enough importance to what
might or might not have been said by the civilian citizens
to lie about it "That’s not the question It’s whethei or not
we, as soldiers, that have worn the uniform, are going to
be the first to state where we stand To show these people
right off just where the government of the country stands
on such things That there wont be any need for them even
to talk” His plan was quite simple It was to form the
legion Post into a platoon, with himself m command vide
his active commission "But if they dont want me to com-
mand, that’s all right too I’ll be second, if they say Or a
sergeant or a corporal ” And he meant it It was not vain
glory that he wanted He was too smcere So sincere, so
humorless, that the legion commander withheld the flip-
pant refusal he was about to make

“I still dont think that there is any need of it And if there
was, we would all have to act as civilians I couldn’t use the
Post like that After all, we are not soldiers now I dont
think I would, if I could ”

Grimm looked at him, without anger, hut rather as if he
were some kind of bug "Yet you wore the uniform once,”
he said, with a land of patience He said "I suppose you
wont use your authority to keep me from talking to them,
will you? As individuals?”

"No I haven’t any authority to do that, anyway But just
as individuals, mmd You mustn’t use my name at all ”

Then Grimm gave him a shot on his own account “X
am not likely to do that,” he said Then he was gone That
was Saturday, about four o’clock For the rest of that after-
noon he circulated about the stores and offices where the
legion members worked, so that by nightfall he had enough
of them also worked up to his own pitch to compose a fair


S97


platoon He was indefatigable, restrained yet forceful, there
was something about him irresistible and prophethke Yet
the recruits were with the commander m one thing the
official designation of the legion must be kept out of it —
whereupon and without deliberate intent, he had gamed
his ongmal end he was now m command He got them
all together just before suppertime and divided them rate
squads and appointed officers and a staff, the younger ones,
the ones who had not gone to France, taking proper fire by
now He addressed them, briefly, coldly “ order
course of justice let the people see that we have worn
the uniform of the United States And one thing

more ” For the moment now he had descended to famili-
arity the regimental commander who knows his men by
their first names "111 leave tins to you fellows TO do what
you say I thought it might be a good thing if I wear my
uniform until this business is settled So they can see that
Uncle Sam is present m more than spirit ”

“But he's not," one said quickly, immediately, he was of
the same cut as the commander, who by the way was not
present “This is not government trouble yet Kennedy
might not like it This is Jefferson's trouble, not Wash-
ingtons "

“Make him like it," Grimm said "What does your legion
stand for, if not for the protection of America and Ameri-
cans?"

“No,” the other said “I reckon we better not make a
parade out of this We can do what we want without that
Better Amt that right, boys?”

“All right,” Grimm said ""TO do as you say But every
man will want a pistol Well have a small arms' inspection
here m one hour Every man will report here ”

“What's Kennedy going to say about pistols?” one said
Til see to that ” Grimm said “Report here m one hour
exactly, with side arms” He dismissed them. He crossed



398


the quiet square to the sheriffs office The sheriff was at
home, they told him “At home?” he repeated “Now?
Whats he doing at home now?”

“Eating, I reckon A man as big as him has got to eat
several times a day ”

“At home,” Grimm repeated He did not glare, it was
again that cold and detached expression with which he
had looked at the legion commander “Eating,” he said
He went out, already walking fast He recrossed the empty
square, the quiet square empty of people peacefully at
suppertables about that peaceful town and that peaceful
country He went to the sheriffs home The sheriff said No
at once

“Fifteen or twenty folks milling around the square with
pistols m their pants? No, no That wont do I cant have
that That wont do You let me run this ”

For a moment longer Grimm looked at the sheriff Then
he turned, already walking fast agam “All right, * tie said
“If that’s the way you want it I dont interfere with you
and you dont interfere with me, then ” It didn’t sound like
a threat It was too flat, too final, too without heat He went
on, rapidly The sheriff watched him, then he called
Grimm turned

“You leave yours at home, too ” the sheriff said “You
hear me?” Grimm didn’t answer He went on The sheriff
watched him out of sight, frowmng

That evening after supper the sheriff went back down-
town — something he had not done for years save when
urgent and inescapable busmess called He found a picket
of Grimm’s men at the jail, and another m the courthouse,
and a third patrolling the square and the adjacent streets
The others, the relief, they told the sheriff, were m the
cotton office where Grimm was employed, which they were
using for an orderly room, a PC The sheriff met Gnmm
the street, making a round of inspection “Come here.



boy/' the sheriff said Grimm halted He did not approach,
the sheriff went to him He patted Grimm s hip with a fat
hand “I told you to leave that at home” he said Grimm
said nothing He watched the sheriff levelly The sheriff
sighed ‘Well, if you wont, I reckon 111 have to make you
a special deputy But you amt to even show that gun unless,
I tell you to You hear me' 5 ”

“Certainly not,” Grimm said “You certainly wouldnl
want me to draw it if I didn't see any need to ”

“I mean, not till I tell you to ”

“Certainly,” Grimm said, without heat, patiently, immes
diately “That's what we both said Dont you worry IT
be there ”

Later, as the town quieted for the night, as the picture
show emptied and the drug stores closed one by one,
Grimm's platoon began to drop off too He did not protest
watching them coldly, they became a little sheepish, de-
fensive Again without knowing it he had played a trump
card Because of the fact that they felt sheepish, feeling that
somehow they had fallen short of his own cold ardor, they
would return tomorrow if just to show him A few re-
mained, it was Saturday night anyhow, and someone got
more chairs from somewhere and they started a poker
game It ran all night, though from time to time Grimm
(he was not m the game, neither would he permit his
second m command, the only other there who held the
equivalent of commissioned rank, to engage) sent a squad
out to make a patiol of the square By this time the night
marshal was one of them, though he too did not take a
hand in the game

Sunday was quiet The poker game ran quietly through
that day, broken by the periodical patrols, while the quiet
church bells rang and the congregations gathered m de-
corous clumps of summer colors About the square it was
already known that the special Grand Jury would meet to-



400


morrow Somehow the very sound of the two words with
their evocation secret and irrevocable and something of a
hidden and unsleeping and omnipotent eye watching the
doings of men, began to reassure Grimm’s men m their
own makebekeve So quickly is man unwittingly and un-
predictabiy moved that without knowing that they were
thinking it, the town had suddenly accepted Grimm with
lespect and peihaps a little awe and a deal of actual faith
and confidence, as though somehow Ins vision and patri-
otism and pride m the town, the occasion, had been quicker
and truer than theirs His men anyway assumed and ac-
cepted this, after the sleepless mght, the tenseness, the holi-
day, the suttee of volitions surrender, they were almost at
the pitch where they might die for him, if occasion rose
They now moved m a grave and slightly aweinspiring re-
flected light which was almost as palpable as die khaki
would have been which Grimm wished them to wear,
wished that they wore, as though each time they returned to
the orderly room they dressed themselves anew m suave and
austerely splendid scraps of his dream
This lasted through Sunday mght The poker game ran
The caution, the surreptitiousness, which had clothed it was
now gone Theie was something about it too assured and
serenely confident to the braggadocio, tonight when they
heard the marshal’s feet on the stairs, one said, “Ware
M P V an d for an instant they glanced at one another with
hard, bright, daredevil eyes, then one said, quite loud
“Throw foe son of a bitch out,” and another through
pursed lips made the immemorial sound And so the next
morning, Monday, when the first country cars and wagons
began to gather, the platoon was again intact And they
now wore uniforms It was their faces Most of them were
of an age, a generation, an experience But it was more
than that They now had a profound and bleak gravity as
they stood where crowds milled, grave, austere, detached,



401

looking with blank, bleak eyes at the slow throngs who,
feeling, sensing without knowing, drifted before them,
slowing, staling, so that they would be nnged with faces
rapt and empty and immobile as the faces of cows, ap-
proaching and dnftmg on, to be replaced And all morn-
ing the \oices came and wont, m quiet question and
answei “Tlicie he goes That young fellow with ihe auto-
mata pistol lies the captain of them Special officci sent
by tli o goveinoi lie's the head of (he whole thing Shcriil
amt got no say m it today ”

Latei, when it was too late, Gumm told the shenff Ti
you had just listened to me Let rne bung him out of that
cell m a squad of men, instead of sending him across the
square with one deputy and not e\en hand* idled to him, m
afl that crowd wneie that damned Buford didn't dare shoot,
even if he could hit a barn door ”

“How did I know he aimed to break, would think of
trying it right then and there? the shenff said “When
Stevens had done told me he would plead guilty and take
a life sentence ”

But it was too late then It was all over then It happened
m the middle of the square, halfway between the sidewalk
and the couithouse, m the midst of a throng of people thick
as on Fan Day, though the fiisl that Grimm knew r of it was
when he heard the deputy s pistol twice, fired into the an
He knew at once what had happened, though he was a<
the time inside the courthouse His icaction was definite
and immediate He was alicady running towaid the shots
when he shouted back over his shouldei at the man who
had tagged him now for almost fortycight hours as halt
aide and half oiderly “Turn m the fire alarm 1 '

“The fire alazm?’ the aide said “What — '

“Turn m the fire alamd” Grimm shouted back It dom
mattei what folks think, just so they Know that some
thmg ” lie did not finish, he was gone



402

He ran among running people, overtaking and passing
them, since he had an objective and they did not, they were
just running, the black, blunt, huge automatic opening a
way for him like a plow They looked at his tense, hard,
young face with faces blanched and gaped, with round,
toothed orifices, they made one long sound like a murmur-
ing sigh “There went that way ” But already
Grimm had seen the deputy, running, his pistol aloft m his
hand Grimm glanced once about and sprang forward
again, m the thiong which had evidently been pacing the
deputy and the prisoner across the square was the inevitable
hulking youth in the uniform of the Western Union, lead-
ing his bicycle by the horns like a docile cow Grimm
rammed the pistol back into the holster and flung the boy
aside and sprang onto the bicycle, with nevei a break m
motion

The bicycle possessed neither horn nor bell Yet they
sensed him somehow and made way, m this too he seemed
to be served by certitude, the blind and untroubled faith
in the rightness and infallibility of his actions When he
overtook the running deputy he slowed the bicycle The
deputy turned upon him a face sweating, gaped with shout-
ing and running “He turned/' the deputy screamed “Into
that alley by — ”

“I know,” Grimm said “Was he handcuffed?”

"Yes!” the deputy said The bicycle leaped on

"Then he cant run very fast/ Grimm thought "He’ll have
to hole up soon Get out of the open, anyway ’ He turned
into the alley, fast It ran back between two houses, with a
board fence on one side At that moment the fire siren
sounded for the first time, beginning and mounting to a
slow and sustained scream that seemed at last to pass be-
yond the realm of hearing, into that of sense, like soundless
Vibration Grimm wheeled on, thmkmg swiftly, logically,
With a kind of fierce and constrained joy "The first thing



403

he will want is to get out of sight,’ he thought, looking
about On one hand the lane was open, on the other stood
the board fence six feet high At the end it was cut short
off by a wooden gate, beyond which was a pasture and then
a deep ditch which was a town landmark The tops of tall
trees which grew in it just showed above the rim, a regi-
ment could hide and deploy m it “Ah,” he said, aloud
Without stopping or slowing he swept the bicycle around
and pedalled back down the lane toward the street which
he had just quitted The wail of the siren was dying now,
descending back into hearing again, and as he slewed the
bicycle into the street he saw briefly the running people and
a car bearing down upon him For all his pedalling the car
overtook him, its occupants leaned shouting toward his
set, foi wardlooking face “Get in herel” they shouted “In
here 1 ” He did not answer He did not look at them The
car had overshot him, slowmg, now he passed it at his
swift, silent, steady pace, again the car speeded up and
passed him, the men leaning out and looking ahead He
was going fast too, silent, with the delicate swiftness of an
apparition, the implacable undeviation of Juggernaut or
Fate. Behind him the siren began again its rising wail
When next the men m the car looked back for him, he
had vanished completely,

He had turned full speed into another lane His face was
rocklike, calm, still bright with that expression of fulfill-
ment, of grave and reckless joy This lane was more rutted
than the other, and deeper It came out at last upon a bar
len knoll where, springing to earth while the bicycle shot
on, falhng, he could see the full span of the ravine along
the edge of town, his view of it broken by two or three
Negro cabins which lined the edge of it He was quite
motionless, still, alone, fateful, like a landmark almost
Again from the town behind him the scream of the siren
began to fall



404

Then he saw Christmas He saw the man, small with dis-
tance, appear up out of the ditch, his hands close together
ks Grimm watched he saw the fugitive's hands glmt once
like the flash of a heliograph as the sun struck the hand-
cuffs, and it seemed to him that even fiom here he could
heai the panting and desperate bieath of the man who
even now was not free Then the tiny figure ran again and
vanished beyond the neaiest Negio cabin

Grimm ran too now He ran swiftly, yet there was no
haste about him, no effoit There was nothing vengeful
about him either, no fury, no outrage Christmas saw that,
himself Because for an instant they looked at one another
almost face to face That was when Grimm, running, was
m the act of passing beyond the corner of the cabin At that
instant Christmas leaped from the rear window of it, with
an effect as of magic, his manacled hands high and now
glinting as if they were on fire For an instant they glared
at one another, the one stopped in the act of crouching from
the leap, the other in midstride of running, before Grimm's
momentum carried him past the comer In that instant he
saw that Christmas now carried a heavy mckelplated pistol
Gnmm whirled and turned and sprang back past the cor-
ner, drawing the automatic

We was thinking swiftly, calmly, with that quiet joy
"He can do two things He can try for the ditch again, or
he can dodge around the house until one of us gets a shot
And the ditch is on his side of the house ' He reacted im-
mediately He ran at full speed around the corner which
he had just turned He did it as though under the protec-
tion of a magic or a providence, or as if he knew that Christ-
mas would not be waiting there with the pistol He ran
on past the next corner without pausing

He was beside the ditch now He stopped, motionless m
midstnde Above the blunt, cold rake of the automatic his
face had that serene, unearthly lummousness of angels m



405

church windows He was moving agam almost before he
had stopped, with that lean, swift, blmd obedience to what-
ever Player moved him on the Board He ran to the ditch
But m the beginning of his plunge downward into the
brush that choked the steep descent he turned, clawing
He saw now that the cabin sat some two feet above the
eaith He had not noticed it before, m his haste He knew
now that he had lost a point That Christmas had been
watchmg his legs all the time beneath the house He said,
"Good man”

His plunge carried him some distance befoie he could
stop himself and climb back out He seemed indefatigable,
not flesh and blood, as if the Player who moved him for
pawn likewise found him breath Without a pause, in the
same surge that carried him up out of the ditch agam, he
was running again He ran around the cabin m time to see
Christmas flmg himself over a fence three hundred yards
away He did not fire, because Christmas was now running
through a small garden and straight toward a house Run-
rung, he saw Christmas leap up the back steps and enter
the house "Hah,” Grimm said "The preachers house
Hightowers house”

He did not slow, though he swerved and ran around the
house and to the street The car which had passed him and
lost him and then returned was just where it should have
been, just where the Player had desired it to be It stopped
without signal from him and three men got out Without a
word Grimm turned and ran across the yard and into the
house where the old disgraced minister lived alone, and the
three men followed, rushing into the hall, pausing, bringing
with them into its stale and cloistral dimness something
of the savage summer sunlight which they had just left

It was upon them, of them jts shameless savageness Out
of it their faces seemed to glare with bodiless suspension
as though horn haloes as they stooped and raised High-



406

tower, his face bleeding, from the floor where Christmas,
running up the hall, his raised and aimed and manacled
hands full of glare and glitter like lightning bolts, so that
he resembled a vengeful and furious god pronouncing a
doom, had struck him down They held the old man on
his feet

"Which room?” Grimm said, shaking him "Which room,
old man?”

“Gentlemen^” Hightower said Then he said “Men!
Men!”

“Which room, old man?” Grimm shouted

They held Hightower on his feet, m the gloomy hall,
after the sunlight, he too with his bald head and his big
pale face streaked with blood, was terrible “Men!” he cried
“Listen to me He was here that night He was with me the
night of the murder I swear to God — ”

“Jesus Christ!” Grimm cried, his young voice clear and
outraged like that of a young priest “Has every preacher
and old maid m Jefferson taken their pants down to the
yellowbellied son of a bitch?” He flung the old man aside
and ran on

It was as though he had been merely waiting for the
Player to move him agam, because with that unfailing certi-
tude he ran straight to the kitchen and mto the doorway,
already finng, almost before he could have seen the table
overturned and standing on its edge across the comer of
the room, and the bright and glittering hands of the man
who crouched behind it, resting upon the upper edge
Grimm emptied the automatic’s magazine into the table,
later someone covered all five shots with a folded handker-
chief

But the Player was not done yet When the others reached
the kitchen they saw the table flung aside now and Gnmm
stooping over the body When they approached to see what
he was about, they saw that the man was not dead yet, and



407

when they saw what Grimm was doing one of the men
gave a choked cry and stumbled back into the wall and
began to vomit Then Gnmm too spiang back, flin g in g
behind him the bloody butcher knife “Now you’ll let white
women alone, even m hell,” he said But the man on the
floor had not moved He just lay there, with his eyes open
and empty of everything save consciousness, and with
something, a shadow, about his mouth For a long moment
he looked up at them with peaceful and unfathomable and
unbeatable eyes Then his face, body, all, seemed to collapse,
to fall m upon itself, and from out the slashed garments
about his hips and loins the pent black blood seemed to
rush like a released breath It seemed to rush out of his pale
body like the rush of sparks from a rising rocket, upon that
black blast the man seemed to nse soaring into their mem-
ones forever and ever They are not to lose it, in whatever
peaceful valleys, beside whatever placid and reassuring
streams of old age, in the mirroring faces of whatever chil-
dren they will contemplate old disasters and newer hopes
It will be there, musing, quiet, steadfast, not fading and
not particularly threatful, but of itself alone serene, of itself
alone triumphant Again from the town, deadened a little
by the walls, the scream of the siren mounted toward its
unbelievable crescendo, passing out of the realm of hearing



20


NOW THE FINAL COPPER LIGHT OF AFTERNOON FADES, NOW

the street beyond the low maples and the low sign-
board is prepared and empty, framed by the study window
like a stage

He can remember how when he was young, after he first
came to Jefferson from the seminary, how that fading cop-
pei light would seem almost audible, like a dying yellow
fall of trumpets dying into an interval of silence and wait-
ing, out of which they would presently come Already,
even before the falling horns had ceased, it would seem to
him that he could hear the beginning thunder not yet
louder than a whisper, a rumor, m the air

But he had never told anyone that Not even her Not
even her m the days when they were still the nights lovers,
and shame and division had not come and she knew and
had net forgot with division and regret and then despair,
why he would sit here at this window and wait for night-
fall, for the mstant of night Not even to her, to woman
The woman Woman (not the semmary, as he had once
believed) die Passive and Anonymous whom God had
created to be not alone the recipient and receptacle of the

408



409

seed of his body but of his spirit too, which is truth or
near truth as he dare approach

He was an only child When he was bom his father was
fifty years old, and his mother had been an invalid for
almost twenty years He grew up to believe that this was
the result of the food which she had had to subsist on dur-
ing the last year of the Civil War Perhaps this was the
reason His father had owned no slaves, though he was the
son of a man who did own slaves at the time He could
have owned them But though bom and bred and dwelling
in an age and land where to own slaves was less expensive
than not to own them, he would neither eat food grown
and cooked by, noi sleep m a bed prepared by, a Negro
slave Hence during the war and while he was absent from
home, his wife had no gaiden save what she could make
herself or with the infrequent aid of neighbors And this aid
the husband would not allow her to accept for the reason
that it could not be repaid m kmd “God will provide,” he
said

“Provide what? Dandelions and ditch weeds?”

“Then He will give us the bowels to digest them ”

He was a minister Foi a year he had been leaving home
early each Sunday morning before his father (this was be-
fore the sons marriage) who though a member m good
standing of the Episcopal church had not entered any
church since the son could remember, discovered where he
went He found that the son, then ]ust turned twentyone,
was ndmg sixteen miles each Sunday to preach m a small
Presbyterian chapel back m the hills The father laughed
The son listened to the laughter as he would if it had beetf
shouts or curses with a cold and respectful detachment,
saying nothing The next Sunday he went back to his con
gregation

When the war began, the son was not among the first



410

to go Neither was he among the last And he stayed with
the troops for four years, though he fired no musket and
wore instead of uniform the somber frock coat which he
had purchased to be married m and which he had used to
preach m When he leturned home m ’65 he still wore it,
though he never put it on again after that day when the
wagon stopped at the front steps and two men lifted him
down and earned him into the house and laid him on the
bed His wife removed die coat and put it away m a trunk
m the attic It stayed there for twentyfive years, until one
day his son opened the trunk and took it out and spiead out
the careful folds m which it had been airanged by hands
that weie now dead

He remembers it now, siltmg m the dark window m the
quiet study, waiting for twilight to cease, foi night and the
galloping hooves The copper light has completely gone
now, the world hangs m a green suspension m color and
texture like light through colored glass Soon it will be time
to begin to say Soon now Now soon 1 was eight then/
he thinks It was raining 5 It seems to him that he can still
smell the ram, the moist grieving of the October earth, and
the musty yawn as the lid of the trunk went back Then
the garment, the neat folds He did not know what it was,
because at first he was almost overpowered by the evocation
of his dead mother s hands which lingered among the folds
Then it opened, tumbling slowly* To him, the child, it
seemed unbelievably huge, as though maae for a giant, as
though merely from having been worn by one of them, the
cloth itself had assumed the properties of those phantoms
who loomed heroic and tremendous against a background
of thunder and smoke and torn flags which now filled his
waking and sleepmg hie

The garment was almost unrecognisable with patches
Patches of leather, mansewn and crude, patches of Com



411

federate gray weathered Ieafbrown now, and one that
stopped his very heart it was blue, dark blue, the blue of
the United States Looking at this patch, at the mute and
anonymous cloth, the boy, the child bom mto the autumn
of his mother s and fathers lives, whose organs already re-
qmied the unflagging care of a Swiss watch, would experi-
ence a kind of hushed and triumphant terror which left
him a little sick

That evening at supper he would be unable to eat Look-
ing up, the father, now a man nearmg sixty, would find the
child staring at him with terror and awe and with some-
thing else Then the man would say, "What have you been
mto now^” and the child could not answer, could not
speak, staring at his father with on his child s face an ex-
pression as of the Pit itself That night m bed he would not
be able to sleep He would lie ngid, not even trembling, m
his dark bed while the man who was his father and his
only remaining relative, and between whom and himself
there was so much of distance m time that not even the
decades of years could measure, that there was not even any
physical resemblance, slept walls and floors away And the
next day the child would suffer one of his intestinal fits
But he would not tell what it was, not even to the Negro
woman who ran the household and who was his mother too
and nurse Gradually his strength would return And then
one day he would steal again to the attic and open the trunk
and take out the coat and touch the blue patch with that
horrified triumph and sick joy and wonder if his father
had killed the man from whose blue coat the patch came,
wondering with still more horror yet at the depth and
strength of his desire and dread to know Yet on the very
next day, when he knew that his father had gone to call
upon one of his country patients and would not possibly re-
turn before dark, he would go to the kitchen and say to the



412

Negro woman “Tell again about giandpa How many
Yankees did he kilP” And when he listened now it was
without terror It was not even triumph it was pnde
This grandfather was the single thorn m his sons side
The son would no more have said that than he would have
thought it, any more than it would ever have occurred to
either of them to wish mutually that he had been given a
diffeient son or a different father Their relations were
peaceable enough, being on the sons pait a cold, humor-
less, automatically respectful reserve, and on the father’s
a bluff, direct, coarsely vivid humor which lacked less of
purport than wit They lived amicably enough m the two-
stoxey house m town, though for some time now the son
had refused, quiet and firm, to eat any food prepared by the
slave woman who had raised him from babyhood He
cooked his own food m the kitchen, to the Negress’ out-
raged indignation, and put it on the table himself and ate
it face to face with his father, who saluted him punctiliously
and unfailingly with a glass of Bourbon whiskey this too
the son did not touch and had never tasted
On the son’s wedding day the father surrendered the
house He was waiting on the porch, with the key to the
house m his hand, when the bride and groom arrived He
wore his hat and cloak About him was piled his personal
luggage and behind him stood the two slaves which he
owned the Negro woman who cooked, and his 'boy/ a man
older than himself and who did not have one remaining
hair, who was the cook’s husband He was not a planter,
he was a lawyer, who had learned law somewhat as his son
was to learn medicine, “hy mam strength and the devil’s
grace and luck” as he put it He had already bought for
himself a small house two miles m the country, and his
surrey and his matched team stood before the porch wait-
ing while he too stood, his hat tilted back and his legs apart
—a hale, bluff, rednosed man with the moustache of a



413

brigand chief — while the son, and the daughter-m-la^
whom he had never seen before, came up the path from
the gate When he stooped and saluted her, she smelled
whisky and cigars 1 reckon you’ll do,” he said His eyes
weie bluff and bold, but kind "All the sanctimonious cuss
wants anyway is somebody that can sing alto out of a
Presbyterian hymnbook, where even the good Lord Hmv
self couldn’t squeeze m any music ”

He drove away m the tasselled surrey, with his personal
belongings about him — his clothes, his demijohn, his slaves
The slave cook did not even remain to prepaie the first
meal She was not offered, and so not refused The father
never entered the house again alive He would have been
welcome He and the son both knew this, without it ever
being said And the wife — she was one of many children
of a genteel couple who had never got ahead and who
seemed to find m the church some substitute for that which
lacked upon the dmnertable — liked him, admired him in a
hushed, alarmed, secret way his swagger, his bluff and
simple adheience to a simple code They would hear of his
doings though, of how m the next summer after he re-
moved to the country he invaded a protracted al fresco
church revival being held m a nearby grove and turned it
into a week of amateur horse racing while to a dwindling
congregation gaunt, fanaticfaced country preachers thun j
dered anathema from the rustic pulpit at his oblivious and
unregeneiate head His reason for not visiting his son and
his daughter-in-law was apparently frank "You’d find me
dull and I’d find you dull And who knows? the cuss
might corrupt me Might corrupt me in my old age into
heaven ” But that was not the reason The son knew that
it was not, who would have been first to fight the aspersion
were it to come from another that there was delicacy of
behavior and thought m the old man
The son was an abolitionist almost before the senti-



414

xnent had become a word to percolate down from the
North Though when he learned that the Republicans did
have a name for it, he completely changed the name of his
conviction without abating his principles or behavior one
jot Even then, not yet thirty, he was a man of Spartan so-
briety beyond his years, as the offspring of a not overly
particular servant of Chance and the bottle often is Per-
haps that accounted for the fact that he had no child until
after the war, from which he returned a changed man, ‘De-
odorised/ as his dead father would have put it, of sanctity
somewhat Although during those four years he had never
fired a gun, his service was not alone that of praying
and preaching to troops on Sunday mornings When he re-
turned home with his wound and recovered and established
himself as a doctor, he was only practising the surgery and
the pharmacy which he had practised and learned on the
bodies of friend and foe alike while helping the doctors at
the front This probably of all the son s doings the father
would have enjoyed the most that the son had taught him-
self a profession on the invader and devastator of his coun-
try

‘Rut sanctity is not the word for him/ the son's son m turn
thinks, sitting at the dark window while outside the world
hangs m that green suspension beyond the faded trumpets
‘Grandfather himself would have been the first to confront
any man that employed that term ’ It was some throwback
to the austere and not dim times not so long passed, when
a man m that country had little of himself to waste and
little time to do it m, and had to guard and protect that
little not only from nature but from man too, by means of
a sheer fortitude that did not offer, in his lifetime anyway,
physical ease for reward That was where his disapproval
of slavery lay, and of his lusty and sacrilegious father The
very fact that he could and did see no paradox in the fact
that he took an active part m a partisan war and on the



415

very side whose principles opposed his own, was proof
enough that he was two separate and complete people,
one of whom dwelled by serene rules m a world where real-
ity did not exist

But the other part of him, which lived in the actual
world, did as well as any and better than most He lived
by his principles in peace, and when war came he carried
them into war and hved by them there, when there was
preaching on peaceful Sundays m quiet groves to be done,
he had done it, without any particular equipment for it
other than his will and his convictions and what he could
pick up as he went along, when there was the saving of
wounded men under fire and the curing of them without
proper tools, he did that too, again without other equip-
ment save his strength and courage and what he could pick
up as he went along And when the war was lost and the
other men returned home with their eyes stubbornl) re-
verted toward what they refused to believe was dead, he
looked forward and made what he could of defeat by mak-
ing practical use of that which he had learned in it He
turned doctor One of his first patients was his wife Possibly
he kept her alive At least, he enabled her to produce life,
though he was fifty and she past forty when the son was
bom That son grew to manhood among phantoms, and
side by side with a ghost

The phantoms were his father, his mother, and an old
Negro woman The father who had been a minister without
a church and a soldier without an enemy, and who m de-
feat had combined the two and become a doctor, a surgeon
It was as though the very cold and uncompromising con-
viction which propped him upright, as it were, between
puritan and cavalier, had become not defeated and not dis-
couraged, but wiser As though it had seen m the smoke
of cannon as m a vision that the laymgon of hands meant
literally that As if he came suddenly to believe that Christ



416

had meant that him whose spirit alone required healing,
was not worth the having, the saving That was one phan-
tom The second was the mother whom he lemembers fiist
and last as a thm face and tremendous eyes and a spread
of dark hair on a pillow, with blue, still, almost skeleton
hands If on the day of her death he had been told that he
had ever seen her otherwise than m bed, he would not have
believed it Later he remembered differently he did lemem-
her her moving about the house, attending to houshold
affairs But at eight and nine and ten he thought of her as
without legs, feet, as being only that thm face and the
two eyes which seemed daily to grow bigger and bigger, as
though about to embrace all seeing, all life, with one last
ternble glare of frustration and suffering and foreknowl-
edge, and that when that finally happened, he would hear
it it would be a sound, like a cry Already, before she died,
he could feel them thiough all walls They were the house
he dwelled within them, within their dark and all-embracing
and patient aftermath of physical betrayal He and she both
lived m them like two small, weak beasts m a den, a cavern,
into winch now and then the father enteied — that man who
was a stranger to them both, a foreigner, almost a threat
so quickly does the body’s wellbeing alter and change the
spirit He was more than a stranger he was an enemy He
smelled differently from them He spoke with a diffeient
voice, almost m different words, as though he dwelled by
ordinary among different surroundings and in a different
world, crouching beside the bed the child could feel the
man fill the room with rude health and unconscious con-
tempt, he too as helpless and frustrated as they
The third phantom was the Negro woman, the slave, who
had ndden away m the surrey that morning when the son
and his bride came home She rode away a slave, she re-
turned in ’66 still a slave, on foot now— a huge woman,
with a face both irascible and calm the mask of a black



417

tragedy between scenes After her master's death and until
she was convinced at last that she would never more see
either him or her husband — the ‘boy/ who had followed
the master to the war and who also did not return — she
refused to leave the house m the country to which he*
mastei had moved and of which he had left m her charge
when he lode away Aftei the fathers death the son went
out, to close the house and remove his father's private pos-
sessions, and he offeied to make provision for her She re-
fused She also refused to leave She made her own small
kitchen gaiden and she lived there, alone, waiting for her
husband to return, the rumor of whose death she refused
to believe It was just lumoi, vague how, following his
master s death in Van Dorn's cavalry raid to destroy Grant's
stores m Jefferson, the Negro had been inconsolable One
night he disappeared from the bivouac Piesently there be-
gan to come back tales of a crazy Negro who had been
halted by Confederate pickets close to the enemy's front,
who told the same garbled story about a missing master
who was being held for lansom by the Yankees They could
not make him even entertain for a moment the idea that
the master might be dead “No, suh," he would say “Not
Marse Gail Not him Dey wouldn't dare to loll a High-
tower Dev wouldn't dare Dey got 'im hid somewhar, trym'
to sweat outen him whar me and him hid Mistis coffee
pot and de gole waiter Dat's all dey wants " Each time he
would escape Then one day word came back from the Fed
eral lines of a Negro who had attacked a Yankee officer
with a shovel, forcing the officer to shoot him to protect his
own life

The woman would not believe this for a long time “Not
dat he ami fool enough to done it," she said “He jest amt
got ernough sense to know a Yankee to hit at wid a shovel
if he wuz to see um " She said that for over a year Then one
day she appeared at the son's home, the house which she



418

had quitted ten years ago and had not entered since, ca*
rymg her possessions m a handkerchief She walked into the
house and said “Here I is You got ernough wood in de box
ter cook supper wid?”

“You re free, now/' the son told her

“Free?” she said She spoke with still and brooding scorn.
*Free? What’s freedom done except git Marse Gail killed
and made a bigger fool outen Pawmp den even de Lawd
Hisself could do? Free? Dont talk ter me erbout freedom ”

This was the third phantom With this phantom the child
(and he little better than a phantom too, then/ that same
child now thinks beside the fading window) talked about
the ghost They never tired the child with rapt, wide, half
dread and half delight, and the old woman with musing
and savage sorrow and pride But this to the child was ]ust
peaceful shuddering of delight He found no terror in the
knowledge that his grandfather on the contrary had killed
men *by the hundreds’ as he was told and believed, or in
the fact that the Negro Pomp had been trying to kill a man
when he died No horrox here because they were ]ust ghosts,
never seen m the flesh, heroic, simple, warm, while the
father which he knew and feared was a phantom which
would never die ‘So it’s no wonder/ he thinks, That I
skipped a generation It’s no wonder that I had no father
and that I had already died one night twenty years before
I saw light And that my only salvation must be to return
to the place to die where my life had already ceased before
it began ’

While at the seminary, after he first came there, he often
thought how he would tell them, the elders, the high and
sanctified men who were the destiny of the church to which
he had willingly surrendered How he would go to them
and say, “Listen God must call me to Jefferson because my
life died there, was shot from the saddle of a galloping horse
m a Jefferson street one night twenty years before it was



419

ever bom * He thought that he could say that, at first
He believed that they would comprehend He went there,
chose that as his vocation, with that as his purpose But he
believed m more than that He had believed m the church
too, m all that it ramified and evoked He believed with a
calm joy that if ever there was shelter, it would be the
Church, that if ever truth could walk naked and without
shame or fear, it would be m the seminary When he be-
lieved that he had heard the call it seemed to him that he
could see his futuie, his life, mtact and on all sides complete
and inviolable, like a classic and serene vase, where the
spirit could be born anew sheltered from the harsh gale of
living and die so, peacefully, with only the far sound of the
circumvented wind, with scarce even a handful of rotting
dust to be disposed of That was what the word seminary
meant quiet and safe walls within which the hampered
and garmentworned spirit could learn anew serenity to con-
template without horror or alarm its own nakedness
‘But there are more things m heaven and earth too than
truth/ he thinks, paraphrases, quietly, not quizzical, not
humorous, not unquizzical and not humorless too Sitting
m the failing dusk, his head in its white bandage looming
bigger and more ghostly than ever, he flunks, ‘More things
indeed/ thinking how ingenuity was apparently given man
in order that he may supply himself m crises with shapes
and sounds with which to guard himself from truth He
had at least one thing to not repent that he had not made
the mistake of telling the elders what he had planned to
say He had not needed to live m the seminary a year be-
fore he learned better than that And more, worse that
with the learning of it, instead of losing something he had
gained, had escaped from something And that that gam
had colored the very face and shape of love

She was the daughter of one of the ministers, the teach-
ers, m the college Like himself, she was an only child He


i



420

believed at once that she was beautiful, because he had
heard of her before he ever saw her and when he did see her
he did not see her at all because of the face which he had
already created m his mind He did not believe that she
could have lived there all her life and not be beautiful He
did not see the face itself for thiee years By that time there
had already been for two years a hollow tree m which they
left notes for one another If he believed about that at
all, he believed that the idea had sprung spontaneously be-
tween them, regardless of whichevei one thought of it, said
it, first But m reality he had got the idea not from her or
from himself, but from a book But he did not see her face
at all He did not see a small oval narrowing too sharply to
chin and passionate with discontent ( she was a year or two
or three older than he was, and he did not know it, was
never to know it) He did not see that for three years her
eyes had watched him with almost desperate calculation,
like those of a harassed gambler

Then one night he saw her, looked at her She spoke sud-
denly and savagely of mainage It was without preamble
or warning It had never been mentioned between them
He had not even ever thought of it, thought the word He
had accepted it because most of the faculty were married
But to him it was not men and women m sanctified and
living physical intimacy, but a dead state carried over
into and existmg still among the living like two shadows
chained together with the shadow of a chain He was used
to that, he had grown up with a ghost Then one evemng
she talked suddenly, savagely When he found out at last
what she meant by escape from her present life, he felt no
surprise He was too innocent "Escape?” he said “Escape
from what^’

"This!” she said He saw her face for the first time as a
living face, as a mask before desire and hatred wrung,



421

blind, headlong with passion Not stupid just blind, reck
less, despeiate “All of id All* A1P”

He was not surprised He believed at once that she was
right, and that he just had not known better He believed
at once that his own belief about the seminary had been
wrong all the while Not seriously wrong, but false, incor-
rect Peihaps he had already begun to doubt himself, with-
out knowing it until now Perhaps that was why he had not
yet told them why he must go to Jefferson He had told her,
a year ago, why he wanted to, must, go there, and that he
intended to tell them the reason, she watching him with
those eyes which he had not yet seen “You. mean,” he said,
“that they would not send me? arrange for me to go? That
that would not be reason enough?”

“Certainly it wouldn’t,” she said

“But why? Thats the truth Foolish, maybe But true
And what is the church for, if not to help those who are
foolish but who want truth? Why wouldn’t they let me go?”

“Why, I wouldn’t let you go myself, if I were them and
you gave me that as your reason ”

“Oh,” he said “I see ” But he did not see, exactly, though
he believed that he could have been wrong and that she
was right And so when a year later she talked to him sud-
denly of marriage and escape in the same words, he was
not surprised, not hurt He just thought quietly, ‘So this is
love I see I was wrong about it too,’ thinking as he had
thought before and would think again and as every other
man has thought 4 how false the most profound book turns
out to be when applied to life
He changed completely They planned to be married He
knew now that he had seen all the while that desperate
calculation in her eyes ‘Perhaps they were nght m putting
love into books,’ he thought quietly ^Perhaps it could not
live anywhere else ’ The desperation was still m them, but



422

now that there were definite plans, a day set, it was quieter,
mostly calculation They talked now of his ordination, of
how he could get Jefferson as his call “We’d better go to
work right away/’ she said He told her that he had been
working for that since he was four years old, perhaps he
was being humorous, whimsical She brushed it aside with
that passionate and leashed humorlessness, almost inatten-
tion, talking as though to herself of men, names, to see, to
grovel to or threaten, outlining to him a campaign of abase-
ment and plotting He listened Even the faint smile, whim-
sical, quizzical, perhaps of despair, did not leave his face
He said, “Yes Yes I see I understand,” as she talked It
was as if he were saying Yes I see I see now That’s how
theij do such , g am such That’s the rule I see now
At first, when the demagoguery, the abasement, the small
lying had its reverberation in other small lies and ultimate
threats m the form of requests and suggestions among the
hierarchate of the Church and he received the call to Jeffer-
son, he forgot how he had got it for the time He did not
remember until after he was settled m Jefferson, certainly
not while the tram of the journey’s last stage fled toward the
consummation of his life across a land similar to that where
he had been born But it looked different, though he knew
that the difference lay not outside but inside the car win-
dow against which his face was almost pressed like that of
a child, while his wife beside him had also now something
of eagerness in her face, besides hunger and desperation
They had been married now not quite six months They
had married directly after his graduation Not once smce
then had he seen the desperation naked m her face But
neither had he seen passion again And again he thought
quietly, without much surprise and perhaps without hurt
I see That’s the way it is Marriage Yes I see now
The tram rushed on Leaning to the window, watching
the fleeing countryside, he talked in the bright, happy voice



423

of a child “I could have come to Jefferson before, at almost
any time But I didn t I could have come at any tame
There is a difference, you know, between civilian and mili-
tary casualness Military casualness? Ah, it was the casual-
ness of desperation A handful of men (he was not an
officer I think that was the only point on which father and
old Cinthy were ever m accord that grandfather wore no
sword, galloped with no sword waving in front of the rest
of them) performing with the grim levity of schoolboys a
prank so foolhardy that the troops who had opposed them
for four years did not believe that even they would have
attempted it Biding for a hundred miles through a country
where every grove and hamlet had its Yankee bivouac, and
into a garrisoned town — I know the very street that they
rode into town upon and then out again I have never seen
it, but I know exactly how it will look I know exactly how
the house that we will some day own and live in upon the
street will look It wont be at fiist, for a while We will have
to live m the parsonage at first But soon, as soon as we
can, where we can look out the window and see the street,
maybe even the hoofmarks or their shapes m the air, be-
cause the same air will be there even if the dust, the mud,
is gone — Hungiy, gaunt, yelling, setting fire to the store
depots of a whole carefully planned campaign and ndmg
out again No looting at all no stopping for even shoes, to-
bacco I tell you, they were not men after spoils and glory,
they were boys ndmg the sheer tremendous tidal wave of
desperate living Boys Because this This is beautiful Lis-
ten Try to see it Here is that fine shape of eternal youth
and virginal desire which makes heroes That makes the
doings of heroes border so close upon the unbelievable that
it is no wonder that their domgs must emerge now and then
like gunflashes m the smoke, and that their very physical
passing becomes rumor with a thousand faces before breath
is out of them, lest paradoxical truth outrage itself Now this



424

is what Cinthy told me And I believe I know Its too fine
to doubt It’s too fine,, too simple, ever to have been invented
by white thinking A Negro might have invented it And if
Cmihy did, I still beheve Because even fact cannot stand
with it I dont know whether grandfather s squadron were
lost or not I dont think so I think that they did it deliber-
ately, as boys who had set fire to an enemy’s barn, without
taking so much as a shingle or a door hasp, might pause m
flight to steal a few apples from a neighbor, a friend Mmd
you, they were hungry They had been hungry for three
years Perhaps they weie used to that Anyway, they had ]ust
set fire to tons of food and clothing and tobacco and liquors,
taking nothing though there had not been issued any order
against looting, and they turn now, with all that for back-
ground, backdrop the consternation, the conflagration, the
sky itself must have been on fire You can see it, hear it
the shouts, the shots, the shouting of triumph and terror, the
dramming hooves, the tiees uprearmg against that red glare
as though fixed too m terror, the sharp gables of houses like
the jagged edge of the exploding and ultimate earth Now it
is a close place you can feel, hear in the darkness horses
pulled short up, plunging, clashes of arms, whispers over-
loud, hard breathing, the voices still triumphant, behind
them the rest of the troops galloping past toward the rallying
bugles That you must hear, feel then you see You see be-
fore the crash, m the abrupt red glare the horses with wide
eyes and nostrils m tossing heads, sweatstamed, the gleam of
metal, the white gaunt faces of living scarecrows who have
not eaten all they wanted at one time since they could re-
member, perhaps some of them had already dismounted,
perhaps one or two had already entered the henhouse All
this you see before the crash of the shotgun comes then
blackness again It was just the one shot ‘And of course he
would be aght m de way of hit/ Cinthy said ‘Stealin chick-
ens A man growed, wid a married son, gone to a war whar



425

lus business was killin’ Yankees, killed in somebody else’s hen-
house wid a han’ful of feathers ’ Stealing chickens ” His voice
was high, childlike, exalted Already his wife was clutching
his arm Shhhhhhh? Shhhhhhhhhf People are looking at you f
But he did not seem to hear her at all His thin, sick face,
lus eyes, seemed to exude a kind of glow “That was it
They didn’t know who fired the shot They never did know
They didn’t try to find out It may have been a woman,
likely enough the wife of a Confederate soldier I like to
think so It’s fine so Any soldier can be killed by the enemy
m the heat of battle, by a weapon approved by the arbiters
and rulemakeis of warfare Or by a woman m a bedroom
But not with a shotgun, a fowling piece, m a henhouse And
so is it any wonder that this world is peopled principally by
the dead? Surely, when God looks about at their successors.
He cannot be loath to share His own with us ”

“Hush? Shhhhhhhhh! They are looking at us?”

Then the tiam was slowing into the town, the dmgy pur-
lieus slid vanishing past the window He still looked out
■ — a thm, vaguely untidy man with still upon him some-
thing yet of die undimmed glow of his calling, his vocation
— quietly surrounding and enclosmg and guarding his ur-
gent heart, thinking quietly how surely heaven must have
somedung of die color and shape of whatever village or
hill or cottage of which the believer says, This is my own
The tram stopped the slow aisle, still interrupted with out-
looking, then the descent among faces grave, decorous, and
judicial the voices, the murmurs, die broken phrases kindly
yet still reserved of judgment, not yet giving and (let us
say it) prejudicial T admitted that,’ he thinks T believe
that I accepted it But perhaps that was all I did do, God
forgive me’ The earth has almost faded from sight It is
almost night now His bandagedistorted head has no depth
no solidity, immobile, it seems to hang suspended above
the twin pale blobs which are his hands lying upon the



426

ledge of the open window He leans forward Already he
can feel the two instants about to touch the one which is
the sum of his life, which renews itself between each dark
and dusk, and the suspended instant out of which the soon
will piesently begin When he was younger, when his net
was still too fine for waiting, at this moment he would
sometimes tuck himself and believe that he heard them be-
fore he knew that it was time
^Perhaps that is all I ever did, have ever done/ he thinks,
thinking of the faces the faces of old men naturally dubious
of his youth and jealous of the church which they were put-
ting into his hands almost as a father surrenders a bride
the faces of old men lined by that sheer accumulation of
frustration and doubt which is so often the other side of
the picture of hale and respected full years — the side, by
the way, which the subject and proprietor of the picture has
to look at, cannot escape looking at ‘They did their part,
they played by the rules/ he thinks T was the one who
faded, who mfrmged Perhaps that is the greatest social sm
of all, ay, perhaps moral sm ? Thinking goes quietly, tran-
quilly, flowing on, falling mto shapes quiet, not assertive,
not reproachful, not particularly regretful He sees himself
a shadowy figure among shadows, paradoxical, with a kind
'of false optimism and egoism believing that he would find
in that part of the Church which most blunders, dream-
recovering, among the blind passions and the lifted hands
and voices of men, that which he had faded to find in the
Church’s cloistered apotheosis upon earth It seems to him
that he has seen it all the whde that that which is destroy-
ing the Church is not the outward groping of those withm
it nor the mward groping of those without, but the profes-
sionals who control it and who have removed the bells from
its steeples He seems to see them, endless, without order,
empty, symbolical, bleak, skypointed not with ecstasy or
passion but in adjuration, threat, and doom He seems to



427

see the churches of the world like a rampart, like one of
those barricades of the middleages planted with dead and
sharpened stakes, against truth and against that peace in
which to sm and be forgiven which is die life of man
‘And I accepted that/ he thinks T acquiesced Nay, I did
worse I served it I served it by using it to forward my own
desire I came here where faces full of bafflement and hun-
ger and eagerness waited for me, waiting to believe, I did
not see them Where hands were raised for what they
believed that I would brmg them, I did not see them I
brought with me one trust, perhaps the first trust of man,
which I had accepted of my own will before God, I con-
sidered that piomise and trust of so little worth that I did
not know that I had even accepted it And if that was all I
did for her, what could I have expected? what could I have
expected save disgrace and despair and the face of God
turned away in very shame? Perhaps m the moment when
I revealed to her not only the depth of my hunger but the
fact that never and never would she have any part m
the assuaging of it, perhaps at that moment I became her
seducer and her murderer, author and instrument of her
shame and death After all, there must be some things for
winch God cannot be accused by man and held lesponsible
There must be ? Thinking begins to slow now It slows like
a wheel beginning to run m sand, the axle, the vehicle, the
power which propels it not yet aware

He seems to watch himself among faces, always among,
enclosed and surrounded by, faces, as though he watched
himself m his own pulpit, from the rear of the church, or
as though he were a fish m a bowl And more than that the
faces seem to be mirrors in which he watches himself He
knows them all, he can read his doings m them He seems
to see reflected m them a figure antic as a showman, a little
wild a charlatan preaching worse than heresy, m utter dis-
regard of that whose very stage he preempted, offering in-



428

stead of the crucified shape of pity and love, a swaggering
and unchastened biavo killed with a shotgun m a peaceful
henhouse, in a temporary hiatus of his own avocation of
killing The wheel of thinking slows, the axle knows it now
but the vehicle itself is still unawaie

He sees the faces which sunound him minor astonish-
ment, puzzlement, then outrage, then fear, as if they looked
beyond his wild antics and saw behind him and looking
down upon him, m his turn unaware, the final and supreme
Face Itself, cold, terrible because of Its omniscient detach-
ment He knows that they see more than that that they see
the trust of which he proved himself unworthy, being used
now for his chastisement, it seems to him now that he talks
to the Face “Perhaps I accepted more than I could per-
form But is that criminal? Shall I be punished for that?
Shall I be held responsible for that which vas beyond my
power?” And the Face “It was not to accomplish that that
you accepted her You took her as a means toward your
own selfishness As an instrument to be called to Jefferson,
not for My ends, but for your own ”

Ts that true?" he thinks "Could that have been true?" He
sees himself again as when the shame came He remembers
that which he had sensed before it was bom, hiding it from
his own flunking He sees himself offer as a sop fortitude
and foibearance and dignity, making it appear that he re-
signed his pulpit for a martyr's reasons, when at the very
instant there was withm him a leaping and triumphant
surge of denial behind a face which had betrayed him, be-
having itself safe behind the lifted hymnbook, when the
photographer pressed his bulb
He seems to watch himself, alert, patient, skillful, playing
his cards well, makmg it appear that he was being driven,
uncomplaining, into that which he did not even then admit
had been his desire since before he entered the seminary
And still casting his sops as though he were flinging rotten



429

fruit before a drove of hogs the meagre income from his
father which he continued to divide with the Memphis in-
stitution, allowing himself to be persecuted, to be dragged
from his bed at night and carried into the woods and beaten
with sticks, he all the while bearing m the town’s sight and
hearing, without shame, with that patient and voluptuous
ego of the martyr, tire air, the behavior, the How long , O
Lord until, inside his house again and the dooi locked, he
lifted the mask with voluptuous and triumphant glee Ah
That’s done now That’s past now That’s bought and paid
for now

"But I was young then/ he thinks 1 too had to do, not
what I could, but what I knew’ Thinking is running too
heavily now, he should know it, sense it Still the vehicle
is unaware of what it is approaching "And after all, I have
paid I have bought my ghost, even though I did pay for it
with my life And. who can forbid me doing that? It is any
man’s privilege to destroy himself, so long as he does not
injure anyone else, so long as he lives to and of himself — *
He stops suddenly Motionless, unbreathing, there comes
upon him a consternation which is about to be actual hor-
ror He is aware of the sand now, with the realisation of it
he feels within himself a gathering as though for some tre-
mendous effort Progress now is still progress, yet it is now
indistinguishable from the recent past like the already trav-
ersed inches of sand which cling to the turning wheel, rain-
ing back with a dry hiss that before this should have warned
him " revealed to my wife my hunger, my ego
instrument of her despair and shame ’ and without his
having thought it at all, a sentence seems to stand fullsprung
across his skull, behmd his eyes I dont want to think this
I must not think this I dare not think this As he sits in the
window, leaning forward above his motionless hands, sweat
begins to pour from him, springing out like blood, and pour-
ing Out of the instant the sandclutched wheel of thinking



430

turns on with the slow implacability of a mediaeval torture
instrument, beneath the wrenched and broken sockets of
his spirit, his life ‘Then, if this is so, if I am the instrument
of her despair and death, then I am in turn instrument of
someone outside myself And I know that for fifty years I
have not even been clay I have been a single instant of
darkness m which a horse galloped and a gun crashed And
if I am my dead grandfather on the instant of his death,
then my wife, his grandsons wife the debaucher and
murderer of my grandson's wife, since I could neither let my
grandson live or die

The wheel, released, seems to rush on with a long sighing
sound He sits motionless m its aftermath, m his cooling
sweat, while the sweat pours and pours The wheel whirls
on It is going fast and smooth now, because it is freed now
of burden, of vehicle, axle, all In the lambent suspension of
August into which night is about to fully come, it seems
to engender and surround itself with a faint glow like a
halo The halo is full of faces The faces are not shaped with
suffering, not shaped with anything not horror, pam, not
even repioach They are peaceful, as though they have es-
caped into an apotheosis, his own is among them In fact,
they all look a little alike, composite of all the faces which
he has ever seen But he can distinguish them one from
another his wife's, townspeople, membexs of that congre-
gation which denied him, which had met him at the station
that day with eagerness and hunger, Byron Bunchs, the
woman with the child, and that of the man called Christ-
mas This face alone is not clear It is confused more than
any other, as though m the now peaceful throes of a more
recent, a more inextricable, compositeness Then he can see
that it is two faces which seem to strive (but not of them-
selves striving or desiring it he knows that, but because
of the motion and desire of the wheel itself) m turn to free



431

themselves one from the other, then fade and blend again
But he has seen now, the other face, the one that is not
Christmas ‘Why, its * he thinks 1 have seen it, recently

Why, it’s that boy With that black pistol, auto-

matic they call them The one who into the kitchen
where lulled, who filed the * Then it seems to him
that some ultimate dammed flood within him breaks and
rushes away He seems to watch it, feeling himself losing
contact with earth, lighter and lighter, emptying, floating
T am dying/ he thinks T should pray I should try to pray *
But he does not He does not try ‘With all air, all heaven,
filled with the lost and unheeded crying of all the living
who ever lived, wailing still like lost children among the
cold and terrible stars I wanted so little I asked so
little It would seem ? The wheel turns on It spins now,
fading, without progress, as though turned by that final
flood which had rushed out of him, leaving Ins body empty
and lighter than a forgotten leaf and even more trivial than
flotsam lying spent and still upon the window ledge which
has no solidity beneath hands that have no weight, so that
it can be now Now

It is as though they had merely waited until he could
find something to pant with, to be reaffirmed m triumph
and desire with, with this last left of honor and pride and
life He hears above his heart the thunder mciease, myriad
and drumming Like a long sighing of wind in trees it be-
gins, then they sweep into sight, borne now upon a cloud
of phantom dust They rush past, forwardleamng in the
saddles, with brandished arms, beneath whipping ribbons
from slanted and eager lances, with tumult and soundless
yelling they sweep past like a tide whose crest is jagged
with 3ie wild heads of horses and the brandished arms of
men like the crater of the world in explosion They rush
past, are gone, the dust swirls skyward sucking, fades away



432

into the night which has fully come Yet, leaning forward
in the window, his bandaged head huge and without depth
upon the twin blobs of his hands upon the ledge, it seems
to him that he still hears them the wild bugles and the
clashing sabres and the dying thunder of hooves



21


THERE LTVTS IN THE EASTERN PART OF THE STATE A FURNITURE

repairer and dealer who recently made a trip into Ten-
nessee to get some old pieces of furniture which he had
bought by conespondence He made the journey m his
truck, carrying with him, since the truck ( it had a housedm
body with a door at the rear) was new and he did not in-
tend to drive it faster than fifteen miles an hour, camping
equipment to save hotels On his return home he told his
wife of an experience which he had had on the road, which
interested him at the time and which he considered amus-
ing enough to repeat Perhaps the reason why he found it
interesting and that he felt that he could make it interesting
m the retelling is that he and his wife are not old either,
besides his having been away from home ( due to the very
moderate speed which he felt it wise to restrict himself to )
for more than a week The story has to do with two people,
passengers whom he picked up, he names the town, m Mis-
sissippi, before he entered Tennessee
“I had done decided to get some gas and I was already
slowing into the station when I saw this kind of young,
pleasantfaced gal standing on the corner, like she was wait-
ing for somebody to come along and offer her a ride She

433



434

was holding something m her arms I didn't see what it was
at first, and I didn't see the fellow that was with her at all
until he come up and spoke to me I thought at first that I
didn't see him before was because he wasn't standing where
she was Then I saw that he was the kind of fellow you
wouldn t see the first glance if he was alone by himself m
the bottom of a empty concrete swimming pool

“So he come up and I said, quick like “I amt going to
Memphis, if that's what you want I am going up past Jack-
son, Tennessee ’ And he says,

“ That’ll be fine That would just suit us It would be a
accommodation ' And I says,

“"Where do you all want to go to?' And he looked at me,
like a fellow that amt used to lying will try to think up one
quick when he already knows that he likely amt going to be
believed "You're just looking around, are you?' I says
“ "Yes,' he says "That's it We're just travelling Wherever
you could take us, it would be a big accommodation '

“So I told him to get in "I reckon you amt going to rob
and murder me ' He went and got her and come back Then
I saw that what she was carrying was a baby, a critter not
yearling size He made to help her into the back of the
truck and I says, "Whyn't one of you ride up here on the
seat?' and they talked some and then she come and got on
the seat and he went back into the filling station and got
one of these leatherlookmg paper suit cases and put it into
the bed and got in too And here we went, with her on the
seat, holding the baby and looking back now and then to
see if he hadn't maybe fell out or something
‘1 thought they was husband and wife at first I just never
thought anything about it, except to wonder how a young,
strapping gal like her ever come to take up with him It
wasn't anything wrong with him He looked like a good
fellow, the kind that would hold a job steady and work at
the same job a long time, without bothering anybody about



43S

a raise neither, long as they let him keep on working That
was what he looked like He looked like except when, he
was at work, he would just be something around I just
couldn’t imagine anybody, any woman, knowing that they
had ever slept with him, let alone having anything to show
folks to prove it ”

Amt you shamed P his wife says Talking that way before
a lady They are talking m the dark

Anyway , I cant see you blushing any he says He con-
tinues “I never thought anything about it until that night
when we camped She was sitting up on the seat by me, and
I was talking to her, like a fellow would, and after a while
it begun to come out how they had come from Alabama
She kept on say mg. We come,’ and so I thought she mean*
her and the fellow m the back About how they had been
on the road nigh eight weeks now "You amt had that chap
no eight weeks/ I says "Not if I know color/ and she said
it was just born three weeks ago, down at Jefferson, and I
said, “Oh Where they lynched that nigger You must have
been there then/’ and she clammed up Like he had done
told her not to talk about it I knowed that’ s what it was
So we rode on and then it was coming toward night and 1
said, Well be m a town soon I amt going to sleep in town
But if you all want to go on with me tomorrow, I’ll come
back to the hotel for you m the morning about six o’clock/
and she sat right still, like she was waiting for him to say,
and after a while he says,

“ T reckon with this here truck house you dont need to
worry about hotels/ and I never said anything and we was
coming into the town and he said, ‘Is this here any size
town?’

“ ‘I dont know/ I says T reckon they’ll have a boarding
house or something here though ’ And he says,

“T was wondering if they would have a tourist camp’
And I never said anything and he said. With tents for hire



436

These here hotels are high, and with folks that have a long
piece to go ' They hadn't never yet said where they was go-
ng It was like they didn't even know themselves, like they
was ]nst waiting to see where they could get to But I didn't
know that, then But I knowed what he wanted me to say,
and that he wasn't going to come right out and ask me him-
self Like if the Lord aimed for me to say it, I would say it,
and if the Lord aimed for him to go to a hotel and pay
maybe thiee dollars for a room, he would do that too So I
says,

“ "Well, it's a warm night And if you folks dont mmd a
few mosquitoes and sleeping on them hare boards m the
truck ' And he says,

* "Sho It will be fine It'll be mighty fine for you to let
her ' I noticed then how he said her And I begun to notice
how there was something funny and kind of strained about
him Like when a man is determined to woik himself up to
where he will do something he wants to do and that he is
scared to do I dont mean it was like he was scared of what
might happen to him, but like it was something that he
would die before he would even think about doing it rf
he hadn't just tried everything else until he was desperate
That was before I knew I just couldn't understand what m
the world it could be then And if it hadn't been for that
night and what happened, I reckon I would not have known
at all when they left me at Jackson "

What was it he aimed to do P the wife says

You wait till I come to that part Maybe Til show you, too
fie continues “So we stopped m front of the store He was
already jumping out before the truck had stopped Like he
was afraid I would beat him to it, with his face all shined
up like a kid trying to do something for you before you
change your mmd about something you promised to do
for him He went into the store on a trot and came back
with so many bags and sacks he couldn't see over them, so



437

that I says to myself, ‘Look a here, fellow If you are aim-
ing to settle down permanent in this track and set up
housekeeping" Then we drove on and came pretty soon
to a likely place where I could drive the truck oflF the
road, into some trees, and he jumps down and runs up and
helps her down like she and the kid were made out of glass
or eggs And he still had that look on his face hke he
pretty near had his mmd made up to do whatever it was he
was desperated up to do, if only nothing I did or she did
beforehand would pi event it, and if she only didn’t notice
m his face that he was desperated up to something But
even then I didn’t know what it was ”

What was ift the wife says

I just showed you once You amt ready to be showed
again, are you ?

1 reckon 1 dont mmd if you dont But I still dont see any-
thing funny m that How come it took him all that time
and trouble , anyway ?

It was because they were not married the husband says
It icasnt even his child I didn’t know it then , though I
didn’t find that out until I heard them talking that night by
the fire , when they didn’t know I heard , I reckon Before
he had done got himself desperated up all the way But I
reckon he was desperate enough , all right I reckon he was
just giving her one more chance He continues "So there
he was skirmishing around, getting camp ready, until he
got me right nervous him trying to do everything and not
knowing just where to begin or something So I told him to
go rustle up some firewood, and I took my blankets and
spread them out m the truck I was a little mad, then, at
myself about how I had got mto it now and I would have
to sleep on the ground with my feet to the fire and noth-
ing under me So I reckon I was short and grumpy maybe,
moving around, getting things fixed, and her sitting with
her back to a tree, giving the kid his supper under a shawl



438

and saying ever so often how she was ashamed to incon-
venience me and that she aimed to sit up by the fire be-
cause she wasn’t tired noway, just nding all day long and
not doing anything Then he came back, with enough wood
to barbecue a steer, and she began to tell him and he went
to the truck and taken out that suitcase and opened it and
taken out a blanket Then we had it, sho enough It was
like those two fellows that used to be m the funny papers,
those two Frenchmen that were always bowing and scrap-
ing at the other one to go first, making out like we had all
come away from home just for the privilege of sleeping on
the ground, each one trying to he faster and bigger than
the next For a while I was a mind to say, "All right If you
Want to sleep on the ground, do it Because be durned if I
want to ’ But I reckon you might say that I won Or that
me and him won Because it wound up by him fixing then*
blanket m the truck, like we all might have known all the
time it would be, and me and him spreading mine out be-
fore the fire I reckon he knew that would be the way of it,
anyhow If they had come all the way from south Alabama
like she claimed I reckon that was why he brought in all
that firewood just to make a pot of coffee with and heat
up some tin cans Then we ate, and then I found out *

Found out what ? What it was he wanted to do?

Not right then I reckon she had a little more patience
than you He continues “So we had eaten and I was lying
down on the blanket I was tired, and getting stretched out
felt good I wasn’t aiming to listen, any more than I was
aiming to look like I was asleep when I wasn’t But they
had asked me to give them a ride, it wasn’t me that in-
sisted on them getting m my truck And if they seen fit to
go on and talk without making sho nobody could hear
them, it wasn’t any of my business And that’s how I found
out that they were hunting for somebody, following him,
or trying to Or she was, that is And so all of a sudden I



439

says to myself, ‘Ah-ah Here's another gal that thought sh*
could learn on Saturday night what her mammy waited
until Sunday to ask the minister * They never called his
name And they didn’t know just which way he had run
And I knew that if they had known where he went, it
Wouldn’t be b\ any fault of the fellow that was doing the
lunmng I learned that quick And so I hcaid him talking
to her, about how they might travel on like this from one
truck to another and one state to another foi the lest of
their lives and not find any trace of him and her sitting
theic on the log, holding the chap and listening quiet as a
stone and pleasant as a stone and just about as nigh to
being moved or persuaded And I says to myself, 'Well, old
fellow, I reckon it amt only smcc she has been riding on
the seat of my tiuck while you rode with your feet hanging
out the back end of it that she has travelled out ±n front
on this trip 3 But I ne\er said anything I just lay there and
them talking, 01 him talking not loud He hadn’t cv en
mentioned maxnage, neither But that’s what he was talk-
ing about, and hei listening placid and calm like she had
heard it befoie and sue knew that she nevei even had to
bother to say either yes or no to him Smiling a little she
was But he couldn’t see that

"Then he give up He got up from the log and walked
away But I siw his face when he tinned and I knew that
he hadn’t give up He knew that he had just give hoi one
more chance and that now he had got hmself desperated
up t;o risking all I could have told him lhat he was just de-
ciding now to do what he should have done m the first
place But I reckon he had his own reasons Anyway he
walked oft mto the dark and left her sitting there, wr»h
her face kmcl of ben*- down a little and that smile still on
it She nevei looked after him, neither Maybe she knew he
had just gone oft by himself to get himself V v orbed up good
to what she might have been advising lnm to do all the



440

time, herself, without saying it in out and out words, which
a lady naturally couldn’t do, not even a lady with a Satur-
day night family

"Only I dont reckon that was it either. Or maybe the
time and place didn’t suit her, let alone a audience After a
while she got up and looked at me, but I never moved, and
then she went and climbed into the tmck and after a while
I heard her quit moving around and I knew that she had
done got fixed to sleep And I lay there — I had done got
land of waked up meself, now — and it was a right smart
while But I knew that he was somewhere close, waiting
maybe for the fire to die down 01 for me to get good to
sleep Because, sho enough, just about the time the fire had
died down good, I heard him come up, quiet as a cat, and
stand over me, looking down at me, listening I never made
a sound, I dont know but I might have fetched a snore or
two for him Anyway, he goes on towaid the truck, walk-
ing like he had eggs under his feet, and I lay there and
watched him and I says to myself, "Old boy, if you’d a just
done this last night, youd a been sixty miles further south
than you are now, to my knowledge And if you’d a done it
two nights ago, I reckon I wouldn’t ever have laid eyes on
either one of you’ Then I got a little worried I wasn’t
worried about him doing her any harm she didn’t want
done to her In fact, I was pulling for the little cuss That
was it I couldn’t decide what I had better do when she
would begin to holler I knew that she would holler, and
if I jumped up and run to the truck, it would scare him
off, and if I didn’t come running, he would know that I
was awake and watching him all the time, and he’d be
scared off faster than ever But I ought not to worried I
ought to have known that from the first look I’d taken at
her and at him ”

I reckon the reason you knew you never had to worry



441

was that you had already found oat just what she would
do tn a case like that the wife says

S ho the husband says I didn’t aim for you to find that
out Yes, sii I thought I had covered my tracks this time

Well , go on What happened?

What do you icckon happened, with a big strong gal
like that, without any warning that it was just him, and a
dwn little cuss that already looked like he had reached the
point wheie he could bust out cnjvng like another baby?
He continues “There wasn’t any hollering 01 anything I
just watched him climb slow and easy into the truck and
disappear and then didn’t anything happen for about while
you could count maybe fifteen slow, and then I heard one
kmd of astonished sound she made when she woke up,
like she was just surprised and then a little put out with-
out being scared at all, and she says, not loud neithei "Why,
Mr Bunch Amt you ashamed You might have woke the
baby, too ’ Then he come out tire hack door of the truck
Not fast, and not climbing down on his own legs at all
I be dog if I dont believe she picked him up and set him
back outside on tire ground like she would that baby if it
had been about six years old, say, and she says, TTou go
and lay down now, and get some sleep We got another fur
piece to go tomorrow ’

“Well, I was downright ashamed to look at him, to let
him know that any human man had seen and heard what
happened I be dog if I didn’t want to find the hole and
crawl into it with him I did for a fact And him standmg
there where she had set him down The fire had burned
down good now and I couldn’t hardly see him at all But
I knew about how I would have been standmg and feeling
if 1 was him And that would have been with my head
bowed, waiting for the Judge to say, "Take him out of here
and hang him quick’ And I didn’t make a sound, and



442

after a while I heard him go on off I could hear the bushes
popping, like he had just struck off blind through the
woods And when daylight came he hadn't got back
“Well, I didn't say anything I didn't know what to say
I kept on believing that he would show up, would come
walking up out of die bushes, face 01 no face So I built up
the file and got breakfast staited, and after a while I heard
her climbing out of the truck I never looked aiound But
I could hear her standing there like she was looking around,
like maybe she was trying to tell by the way the fire 01 my
blanket looked if he was there or not But I never said any-
thing and she nevei said anything I wanted to pack up and
get started And I knew I couldn't leave her in the middle
of the road And that if my wife was to hear about me trav-
elling the country with a goodlookmg country gal and a
thiee weeks' old baby, even if she did claim she was hunt-
ing for her husband Or both husbands now So we ate and
then I said. Well, 1 got a long road and I reckon I better
get started ' And she never said nothing at all And when
I looked at her I saw that hei face was just as quiet and
calm as it had ever been I be dog if she was even surprised
01 anything And there I was, not knowing what to do
with her, and she done already packed up her things and
even swept the truck out with a gum branch before she put
m that paper suitcase and made a kind of cushion with
the folded blanket at the back end of the truck, and I says to
myself. It amt any wonder you get along When they up
and run away on you, you just pick up whatever they left
and go on ' — 1 reckon I'll ride back here,' she says
" 1 reckon I can hold him up,' she says
“"Suit youiself,' I says And we drove off, with me hang-
ing out the seat to look back, hoping that he would show
up before we got around the curve But he never Talk
about a fellow bemg caught m the depot with a strange
baby on his hands Here I was with a strange woman and a



44S

baby too, expecting every car that come up from behind
and passed us to be full of husbands and wives too, let alone
sheriffs We were getting close to the Tennessee line then
and I had my mind all fixed how I would either bum that
new truck up or get to a town big enough to have one of
these ladies’ welfare societies m it that I could turn her
over to And now and then I would look back, hoping that
maybe he had struck out afoot after us, and I would see
hex sitting there with her face as calm as church, holding
that baby up so it could eat and ride the bumps at the same
time You cant beat them” He lies in the bed, laughing
“Yes, sir I be dog if you can beat them ”

Then what ? What did she do then ?

Nothing Just sitting there , riding, looking out like she
hadn't ever seen country — roads and trees and fields and
telephone poles — before m her life She never saw him at
all until he come around to the back door of the truck She
never had to All she needed to do was ivait And she knew
that
Iiim ?

Sho He was standing at the side of the road when we
come around the curve Standing there , face and no face ,
hangdog and determined and calm too , like he had done
desperated himself up for the last time , to take the last
chance , and that now he knew he wouldn't ever have to
desperate himself again He continues “He never looked
at me at all I just stopped the truck and him already run-
ning back to go around to the door where she was sitting
And he come around the back of it and he stood there,
and her not even surprised T done come too far now/ he
says T be dog if Tm going to quit now > And her looking at
him hke she had known all the time what he was going to
do before he even knew himself that he was going to, and
that whatever he done, he wasn’t going to mean it

“/Amt nobody never said for you to qult/ she says *



444

He laughs, lying in the bed, laughing “Yes, sir You cant
beat a woman Because do you know what I think? I think
she was just travelling I dont think she had any idea of
finding whoever it was she was following I dont tlimk
she had ever aimed to, only she hadn’t told him yet I
reckon this was the first time she had evei been further
away from home than she could walk back before sun**
down m her life And that she had got along all right this
far, with folks taking good care of her And so I think she
had just made up her mmd to travel a little fuither and
see as much as she could, since I reckon she knew that
when she settled down this time, it would likely be foi the
rest of her life That’s what I think Sitting back there m
that truck, with him by her now and the baby that hadn’t
never stopped eating, that had been eating breakfast now
for about ten miles, like one of these dining cars on the
tram, and her looking out and watching the telephone
poles and the fences passing like it was a circus parade Be-
cause after a while I says ‘Heie comes Saulsbury,’ and she
says,

“ "What?’ and I says,

“"Saulsbury, Tennessee,’ and I looked back and saw her
face And it was like it was already fixed and waiting to
be surprised, and that she knew that when the surprise
jome, she was going to enjoy it And it did come and it
did suit her Because she said,

“‘My, my A body does get around Here we amt been
coming from Alabama but two months, and now it’s already
Tennessee 3 33







